Just don't try and have any sister acts.
Yes, car.
Good morning.
Yeah.
I didn't get a walk this morning because of the work.
Oh, I'm so sorry.
Me neither.
Hopefully you can do it afterwards, get a bit of fresh air, clear your mind.
Welcome ministers, welcome officials.
That you all get settled in.
Good morning. We're just getting ourselves settled.
Yes. It's okay.
Is that all right?
If someone wants to shut this door, that would be
good.
No.
All right then. We are here to hear from both the minister and associate
minister for ACC on ACC as part of our vote
labor
budget estimates. We have about an hour 10
with you, so that'd be typically around about sort of three and a half,
four minutes for opening remarks.
We'll leave that to you, and then we'll open for questions.
Yeah. Thank you, Madam Chair, and good morning, members, at this hour.
We appreciate the commitment of the committee to meet at 8:00 AM.
I have got some opening comments, and I've also asked the associate minister to
make some comments as well. So I'll just go quickly through it.
So,
ACC is a foundational
institution in New Zealand society.
It's a really important aspect of what it is to be a Kiwi,
and I feel very privileged to have the responsibility and the privilege of
being minister of ACC and supported so ably by the Associate Minister
Greg. But ACC's been serving our communities
for 50 years now.
Over those period of years, it's expanded for a number of reasons,
usually quite good reasons.
One of the first things that I did upon becoming minister was to go
back and read the original Sir Owen Woodhouse Royal Commission report that
established ACC. It was a report written in
1967. The language is language, in some
cases, we wouldn't use today. But ACC was quite narrow in
its definition.
But over the years, it has been expanded, often for
societal reasons, because attitudes and society
has changed over those 50 years. So I want to provide a little bit of an update
on what progress we've been making over the last 12 months.
But before I do, I want to introduce our board chair, Jan Dawson.
Jan is the new board chair. Members who were on this committee last
year will remember that we had the acting board chair, David Hunt, here
last year. But Jan's been in the role now for what? Seven months.
About that sort of time.
Yeah.
Megan Mayne, chief executive. And we've got other officials
in the room, including Nick Blakely from MB.
So I want to just talk about my priorities for ACC.
It is a uniquely Kiwi scheme. There is nothing quite like ACC
in any other jurisdiction in the world.
And I think we can, as New Zealanders, be proud of that.
Part of the reason it works so well is because we have a relatively flat
kind of legislative model. We don't have a federal system.
We don't have states. We don't have competing
entities or
whatever. And it is a no litigation, no
fault scheme. We don't talk about that enough these days, in my view, but I think
it's important. But over the years, ACC has
actually become a very large beast.
The numbers involved are eye-wateringly large, and no doubt we'll get a
chance to talk about some of those as we go through this hearing.
So in terms of my priorities, I want to ensure that
ACC is on a stable footing and will be
secure and sustainable for the next 50 years and beyond.
But if we aren't careful, that won't be the case.
There are a number of hurdles and challenges ahead of ACC.
But I'm pleased to say that the board is working on a turnaround plan,
and we'll have a chance to talk about that shortly.
But my priorities are essentially putting clients first.
And at its heart, ACC is about people.
It's about individuals, about people.
And if we get the people part right at ACC, then all the
rest flows from that and kind of sorts itself
out. So putting clients first with the right care and support that they
need and deserve is important to me.
And then secondly, helping New Zealanders return to what
ACC refers to as independence. Getting them back to work,
getting them back to being a functioning member of
society once they have had their
injury
rehabilitated and sorted out. And then
my third
priority is actually getting the organization back to basics.
There was a report that was published last year. Finity did a report.
Some of you will have read that report.
And essentially what it said was that ACC needed to get back to
basics, doing the- Things that they are mandated to do, legislated to do,
day in, day out, consistently, reliably, efficiently, effectively,
and the rest follows. So,
that operational performance had declined over the last 10 years or so.
That turnaround plan I've talked about addresses those matters.
We're in the early stages of that turnaround plan, but we are starting to see
already, I think, some positive results that provide better
outcomes for New Zealanders.
There have been a number of court cases that have expanded the
boundaries of the scheme. But I
wanted to make it clear at the outset that whilst
those decisions have increased the costs of the scheme substantially,
the government is not currently considering any significant changes
to scheme boundaries.
I'm actively involved in updating and focused on some of the
regulatory aspects of ACC, and we can talk about more of that later.
But injury prevention is a big part of the scheme.
Obviously, don't have an accident in the first place helps the scheme work.
And so earlier,
in fact, it was late last year actually, I gave
delegated authority for injury prevention for ACC to the
associate minister. I'm going to ask Nicola Gregg now to make a couple of comments
and speak about a report that will be published very shortly this morning.
Thank you, Minister. Morning, everyone.
Thank you very much for this opportunity.
We're looking forward to speaking about this brilliant entity.
Look, I want to speak to some of the progress that ACC has made in
recent times, preventing injuries and, of course, those
challenges are ongoing and going forward.
But I think it goes without saying that reducing the
incidences and severity of
injuries is our core function.
And we've got to be able to work in a way that eases the financial strain
of the scheme. So you will all have, in your hands,
this just-released report that I want to talk to in the context
of my injury prevention delegation.
This is a snapshot of the 2025 injuries
in New Zealand,
and it will be publicly released later today.
So you really do have it hot off the press.
But
granted you've not had enough time to go through it, but just quickly,
it highlights the impact that injuries are having on the New
Zealand economy. You will see the stand out figure is
$8.7 billion in lost productivity.
Sorry to interrupt you. We've actually reached the limit of our
introductory remarks.
Oh, I had so much more to say. But we could-
But we've got lots of questions to ask you, Minister.
So we'll come back to that perhaps-
By all means
... as a question, if that's okay.
By all means.
I have opening question from Lawrence Yuen, and then we'll come back to you on
injury, because I have a question for that, and looks like Karl does, too.
And
yep, brilliant.
Thank you.
We've got it all stacked up, haven't we?
Thank you, Chair. I guess we definitely do want to discuss more on injury
prevention, so there'll definitely be a chance for the minister.
My opening question is around what we're looking at forecast in
terms of
the budget for ACC this year, and one of the things intend
them to some of the other works being done in other
areas. So, for example,
you would have undoubtedly seen now that it's released,
the department, sorry, not the department, the Select Committee report on the
Health and Safety at Work Bill, where ACC has addressed some serious concerns
around the cost that this will create.
Can you just confirm to the committee
what would be that cost for the forecast with the changes to the Health and
Safety at Work Act?
Sorry, can-
As well as the claims limit
... sorry, can you-- Lawrence, can you just explain again, because you said it's
the health-
No one will have seen that report because it's not been-
The other select-
... reported to the House yet.
No, I'm just at a loss as to quite what your question is.
Well, it should be this afternoon.
This afternoon.
We are on Wednesday, yes.
So
because I want to check with the minister,
whether the minister would agree with ACC officials that a Health and Safety at
Work Amendment Bill changes
to the limit duties on small businesses to critical risk
are unnecessary due to the current act is generally fit for
purpose, and changes are likely to lead to harm, loss of productivity,
and greater costs to the scheme. And if
so, what budget has been factored into
ACC's budget for this coming year to address the changes with
Health and Safety at Work?
Okay.
Well, what I would say is it's a bit hypothetical at this stage.
That legislation hasn't been passed.
ACC, as I said, is a no-fault, no litigation scheme.
So the scheme responds to the
environment in which it operates.
And there's an operational environment that the scheme doesn't
control the boundary. But I'm going to ask Megan to maybe make a
comment.
Morning, Madam Chair, committee.
So in the agency consultation, we shared some data
around the cost of injuries in workplaces.
Mm-hmm.
And
we expressed some data around what
we see as what we call the less serious injuries, so the
sprains and strains, those sorts of injuries that happen in the workplace.
I think the point I would like to make is
keeping people safe, whether it's at work or on the road, is everybody's
responsibility. So that's why our focus is
individuals, employers, whanau, community, making
sure everyone's playing their part.
And the second role for us is using our
data to make sure that where we're active in injury prevention,
it's where we see the highest impact on claim costs.
So we tend to focus on the areas with the highest claim costs
overall. So in workplaces, that's
manufacturing, forestry,
agriculture, construction, and we've seen some really positive
results where we focus with the experts, like the
Forestry Industry Safety Council,
for a long period of time. So for us, injury prevention in workplaces
is a long-term game.
I guess, yeah, just to follow up a question, and this ties into what the minister
was going to say in terms of injury prevention, is what changes would
ACC need to make in terms of the way it discusses workplace
injury prevention, particularly for what you mentioned, the
musculoskeletal harms that could happen for small
businesses now they're no longer re-- Well, they would be no longer
required to manage those risks.
So we would continue to focus on the same messages.
Have a hmm, do everything you can to keep yourself and your
workplace safe. So that doesn't change.
And the second thing, particularly around musculoskeletal injuries, is
when someone is injured, that our recent messaging has been to be
really active in your recovery. And that includes doing all your rehab,
working with your health provider, but also getting back to work
where possible, as early as possible.
So one of the areas we're really focused on with employers is recovery
at work and helping employers to understand that
just being back in the workplace, not necessarily doing your job, because
we'd still be paying weekly compensation to the person, but being back,
that social connection to your work mates helps recovery.
And there's plenty of international evidence that that's good for recovery.
So that's certainly our area of interest in terms
of workplace harm. It's both preventing it and minimizing
the long-term impacts.
Just one final step on that,
Chair.
But the issue that
would appear is that because workplace is no longer required to
manage those kind of risks,
how are you going to be able to track some of the data around that?
It's all very well what
you're saying in terms of overseas examples, but also other overseas
jurisdictions have better work safety protections for
workers, particularly for small businesses when it comes to musculoskeletal harm.
So I've got both my ministers here, they can talk to
that. At the moment, there's been no change-
No, exactly. As I say, it's currently hypothetical
... to the legislation. And we collect data on all injuries.
So over time, we see all sorts of trends in injuries
across the spectrum.
Thank you.
Okay. We have a supplementary from Priyanka Radhakrishnan.
Thank you. With respect, this is a political decision, Minister, the questioning
that, or the questions that Lawrence has asked, because the
legislation that will pass, because you have the numbers to pass them,
will create a small PCBU category for
companies with fewer than 20 employees.
Now, these firms will only be required to
manage critical risks, so death,
notifiable injury, occupational disease.
So that excludes the musculoskeletal harm that Lawrence was
talking about, psychosocial harms as well.
The policy logic there assumes that smaller firms pose
lower risks. So in light of what you'd have said today,
where ACC's focus is on injury prevention within the workplace,
I've tested this against ACC's own data, which
clearly shows that the claim
gradient runs in the opposite direction to what the bill assumes.
So the smallest firms with one to five workers have the highest rate
of injury at 73 per 1,000, compared to 53 per
1,000 for larger firms of over 500 employees.
So the political decision that your government's making on one side of the
spectrum with the Health and Safety at Work Amendment Bill,
will lead to an increase in injury at the workplace, which
ACC is going to have to deal with, with no budget increase.
So how do you propose
to deal with that? What evidence or what advice have you received?
And
why are you making this political move?
Well, I'm not the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety.
The piece of-
Part of government though
... the piece of policy,
legislative initiative that you're referring to is the responsibility of another
minister, and those questions are better asked of
the responsible minister, not me.
So is that not a conversation you've had with your colleagues?
Well, there is nothing
yet passed. The legislation is before a select committee, as I
understand it.
It's just been
deliberated.
Just been deliberated.
And so it's got to come back to the House.
ACC is an entity that
responds to situations when they become an eventuality.
At this stage, this is entirely hypothetical.
And whilst I understand the
path of the questioning, this is not currently a matter for ACC.
Okay. Our next question is for Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair. In looking at the way ACC works
with other government agencies, if we change tack a bit, just
interested to understand how ACC is focused
on working with other agencies to deliver better services,
for example, ambulance and the like.
Yeah. Well,
ACC has a range
of
relationships with other agencies, other ministries, and one of
the
factors that came out of the budget was
some improved funding for
ambulance support. Another area, for instance, is in rescue
helicopters. We do a lot of that. And so
those are areas where ACC is tasked with
working with other agencies, other government departments, to create
better results in terms of access, but also
quickness and pace. So those are, I think, areas that we can
be quite pleased with. There is a-
A relatively collegial, well, it's a very collegial approach between
government agencies and departments.
I don't know whether anyone else might want to comment further.
Well, we have been working with Pharmac as well.
Mm-hmm, Pharmac.
And also the Inland Revenue. So working cross agencies-
Mm
... is really important to be effective and efficient in our
role.
And, thanks, Chair. Do you use any tools?
Are you looking to use AI in any way to find some of those efficiencies and
see where you can improve those cross-agency services
to better use ACC's available
funds?
Well, ACC, as I said earlier, is a big beast.
And I mean beast in a positive way.
It's a big entity and there are some, I think, obvious
efficiency gains to be made by using better technology.
Had an opportunity only a few months ago to go up to
Shamrock House here in Wellington, where that's one of the ACC
call center areas, and listened to calls coming in to the
0800 number. So those people who operate that call
center
are very skilled. They literally don't know what's going to be coming through the
next call. But at the end of each call,
what they used to do was actually have
a few minutes, sometimes five, 10, 15 minutes, to key
in file note comments about the
call, the client, the details, what was agreed, what was
done, and all that sort of stuff. And
given my age- ... I find this stuff still quite miraculous.
Those
phone conversations are now scribed, and at the
end of the conversation, the
AI tool fills in the
notes.
And it's very impressive to see. That saves, at the end of each
call, literally minutes, if not 10 or 15 minutes after each
call.
Right.
Which is a huge efficiency gain.
Mm.
And the accuracy sometimes, I would argue, is potentially more accurate
than
a human doing it. It takes, for instance,
the emotion out of a-
Mm
... a note, a file note, and things like that.
It's a factual recording. So that's just one
little example, but I know that there are others as well.
Yeah. And we're being very thoughtful.
We have a lot of data, and there's a lot of reviewing
of data by humans. AI can look at that
data, and the humans can review the AI tool.
So we're being very thoughtful about how we use AI within the organization.
But it certainly does provide the ability to be more
effective and spend more time face-to-face with clients.
Bra.
All right. Next question, primary question from Priyanka Radhakrishna. Thanks.
Minister, I've got a couple of questions on sexual abuse services, service
provision, but also some of the
intervention side of that.
There has been some reporting around
existing gaps when it comes to sexual abuse service
provision that is funded, I guess, through ACC,
and yet the budget's largely unchanged between '25 and '26.
Mm.
Keen to get a sense of what some of those key gaps are.
What are your priorities around
addressing those gaps?
Look, I'm going to let the Associate Minister, as I said
earlier, the delegation for prevention, because I know that
you've got some points you'd like to make in response.
Mm-hmm, sure.
Excuse me.
Look,
this is I think an increasing area of work for the
agency.
Sexual violence prevention is something that everybody's thinking very
deeply about, because we are seeing incidences of reporting, at the very
least, rising, which therefore would correlate potentially
with incidences occurring within the community.
So ACC is very focused on investing in
community-based sexual violence prevention initiatives
that really do rely on community capability to
reduce the drivers of that harm that are occurring.
ACC is one of the partner agencies that are helping to
redesign, redevelop, and drive Te Orehure, the action
plan.
We, I say the royal we, ACC,
is looking to spend about $7 million across the
'25, '26 year on prevention
of sexual violence initiatives, and I suspect the member might be
talking to one particular provider that's been in the media
recently.
Can I make that presumption?
Part of that was going to be the next question, so yeah.
Okay. So look, ACC is, as I
say, focused on
funding preventative type services as well as
rehabilitation. But it's actually investing already
in a range of initiatives which fall under the umbrella program of
Hiketia for our future. There's actually five community
partners across the country. The Minister of Northland will be pleased to
hear there is one in Northland.
Bay of Plenty, Gisborne, Nelson, Marlborough, and Dunedin.
I actually also launched just very recently a program that we're calling
Little Matters,
which is to help families talk about what is right and what
is wrong because the data's shown us very clearly that too much
emphasis has been placed on the child to understand what harm is and
to report that harm, when actually the adult in the relationship needs
to also be able to have those relationships with that child to
elucidate where harm may be occurring and how to talk through it.
So that's just yet another sort of preventative type-
So, Minister, why was Hiketia cut?
Hiketia wasn't cut
So all the reporting saying that funding to the Hikatea program, which is now
stopped, is not true.
I think you're talking about a program that was called Respected, which-
That was two separate ones from my understanding
... was not funded. Megan, you might be able to talk to the practicalities of it.
Yeah.
But as I understand, Respected wasn't funded as a
Hikatea provider.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
Respected was a provider.
Hikatea is ongoing. We're continuing to fund that.
What we did was we hit pause last year
on further rollout across more regions until we actually
understand how it's working, if we need to make any
changes. We didn't want to roll out across the whole country until we've learnt
from these first five regions, but it's absolutely
ongoing.
What are the current wait times for sexual abuse assessment and
treatment?
I don't have the exact wait times, but we know it's a
huge
challenge. We've increased the capacity of providers to
support people who come forward. The average time it takes someone to
come forward to seek treatment is 14 years after the abuse,
and so we don't want people waiting any longer once they've made that
difficult decision to come forward.
So with our new sensitive claims service, we've increased the number of
providers. We've also made some changes so that
the more advanced, more specialized providers are focusing more
on the people who need it. And for people who perhaps need
counseling as opposed to, say, a psychiatrist, they've got a
separate pathway. So we're trying to, I guess, optimize the
capacity we've got as well.
And look, we can come back to you with the specific
wait times at the moment. I just don't have them in here.
Yeah, sure. Wait times and demand trend, if you could come back on that-
Yeah
... that'd be great.
Great, and we have a supplementary from Lawrence Yunupingu.
Thank you, Chair. I got a couple of subs on this.
Can I just pick up on something you mentioned in terms of Respected and
the fact that Respected funding has been paused.
No, that's not correct. Respected was
never receiving funding.
Funding from that.
They were never a Hikatea
for our future provider.
I see. Thank you. I do want to just check because I think
the issue of prevention of
family and sexual violence is an important one, ACC has a role to play in that.
We've seen some stark figures from the Te Ao Rakirua action plan, for example,
where 92% of the sexual violence homicide were known to
authorities.
I want to check because I'm just going through, Minister, your injuries in New
Zealand, and there wasn't a mention
in there at all of family and sexual violence prevention.
And also I'm looking at the three new priority areas and action plans for
ACC, and not a single word on sexual and
family violence, not a single word on sensitive claims.
So how are you saying what you're
doing in this space when it's not being reflected in your ongoing action plans?
Look, that work is certainly a priority for the organization.
Our new strategy is quite a change in the way
we've presented it. We've presented it around a focus
on timely recovery, putting clients at the center
of their recovery. That covers everything from sort of
serious injury,
less serious injuries, road, work, home,
and
family and sexual violence. So in our strategy, we haven't called that out, but we
certainly have ongoing work in both
continuing to improve our service for sensitive claims,
responding to the significant increase in demand
from the community that we're seeing, as well as this being a
key part of our prevention. It's actually within the efficient
organizational sustainable scheme in terms of the role of
prevention. We describe it as always on.
It's a legislative function. As the minister said at the
beginning,
ultimately the best thing we can do is prevent injuries,
but it's
an always on activity for us.
Yeah, I know. And we've talked about the always on activities a few years ago, and
always on just means that it also can potentially be diluted.
Can I just check, this is more of maybe a nuance.
You mentioned in your priority one, putting clients first.
Mm-hmm.
Would you consider people that you're preventing from being injured in the first
place clients?
Well,
there's probably a
technical legal definition of when someone becomes a client,
but prevention is a big part of what ACC do.
And just
by way of background, the prevention
programs are many and varied. They're not just on domestic
or sexual violence or what we would call sensitive claims areas.
It's a very wide area of prevention.
And by and large, I think ACC does a very good job on
that work. Could we do better? Could the scheme do better?
Probably, yes, but that would be true, I think, of any government agency or
department in any endeavor that they do.
I'm just looking at some stats that you might be interested in.
ACC received over 14,000 new sensitive claims in
the past year and supported over
40,000 people. So these are quite large numbers.
So
to focus just on one, that's just in sensitive claims.
Mm.
So,
that's a lot of work that's being done by ACC staff and
officials,
and prevention is just part of that overall overarching work.
But part of that,
I agree with you, Minister, and I think that's a really important stat.
But also if we're seeing- Like
I said, the prevention of--
at risk of going into prevention, which is my primary question later-
Ah. Which is also mine, Lawrence
... because I want to focus specifically-
Mm
... specifically on family and sexual violence.
You're absolutely right, Minister, but I think one of the issues we're also seeing
is that that is people who didn't report.
Mm.
Who didn't make those kind of claims.
We're also seeing people who are not reporting,
and this is my first part of the question is people who are not reporting, and
that's significant. The second part of the question is, as we've seen
previously when we highlight some of the issues when it comes to the social
securities, the ACC bill that we've seen a few months ago, the
challenge over there is that,
particularly when it comes to sensitive claims, it takes a long time for people to
get through the process or potentially challenge it, et cetera.
It's very traumatic. So on one hand, how do you address people who are
not reporting and claiming in the first place?
On the other hand, how do you address the long turnaround time?
Well,
I would
think, actually, that from what I've seen,
once someone does make contact with ACC on
a sensitive claim, some of those cases are handled,
I think, very quickly.
Some
need to be assessed, but that's the same for any
injury within the scheme. There does need to be a
responsible and appropriate assessment
portion to the
acceptance of the case. But Megan, maybe you've got some comments about that.
But as I said earlier,
I've taken it upon myself to spend quite a lot of time
visiting ACC offices and
facilities around the countryside.
I am enormously impressed with the caliber of people
who are working in ACC handling the sensitive
claims. That is incredibly challenging,
difficult
work, often with people who are in very vulnerable
situations. A lot of it has been historic.
And you rightly point out that in many cases it takes years for people to
actually
decide to make contact with ACC, but when they do,
I'm very confident in the professional capability of
the ACC staff members who interact with those
sensitive claim clients.
Mm.
If I could add further to that, just when you're talking about trying
to
identify those people who have not reported or are yet
to report.
I mean, this is quite an academic conversation.
You could extrapolate that out to any form of
preventative measure across government, for example,
bowel screening, breast screening, prostate checks.
Absolutely.
I think we as politicians, but indeed the NGO
community and society in itself, these are all
conversations that need to be elevated and continued
because a sufferer of family harm
does not necessarily know that they are suffering until someone
somehow gets to them and points it out, and they
can then have services wrapped around them,
here's hoping. But
I would say the same thing that the
minister's just mentioned about the incredible
professionalism that I too have observed within the ACC client
handlers. And I, for my sins, also
handle some individual client cases that the minister kindly
delegated to me, and a lot of those do fall into
that sensitive claims pool. And I just had actually a man in his 80s
come up to me at field days the other day saying just 20 years ago,
he remembered what had occurred to him as a child, and he said he could not get
over how good ACC was, how brilliant, how fleet of foot they
were, and he said, "And if anyone ever criticizes ACC to you, you
tell them to come to me."
Which is very kind of him to say so, but the-
But this wider point, sorry if I can just interrupt.
Please.
This wider point is that responsibility for
prevention of what we collectively refer to as
sensitive case issues is not entirely the responsibility of
ACC. We collectively, as a nation, as citizens,
as parliamentarians, we collectively have a responsibility over
a range of portfolios. There's a
role for education, for justice, for
social development. There's a whole range of government agencies and support
services that play
or have a part of this complicated
mosaic that is what we, as I say, collectively refer to as
sensitive claims.
Right. We'll round this out with a supplementary on your original primary,
Priyanka, and then we'll move on to the next line of questioning.
Yeah. So it was just a supplement on something you said
earlier, Minister. Now I've lost my train of thought.
Oh, we can come back to it.
No, no. It's all good.
Mm.
And my question was around ACC's spend on injury
prevention, which you have mentioned as a priority a few times.
My understanding is that that has reduced over the last couple of years.
Mm-hmm.
I've heard by 50%.
It's very hard to find this information on ACC's own website and
through WPQs. Can the minister confirm whether
ACC's spend on injury prevention has reduced, whether it is by
50%, and what's been cut?
I'm going to ask Megan, the Chief Executive, to answer that question because I
don't have that information at my fingertips.
Yeah.
Can I just check, do you mean
our total spend on injury prevention?
So it certainly hasn't been cut by 50%.
We set a budget each year when we're doing our internal budgeting.
It fits within our operating budget, actually, the spend on
injury prevention.
And in the last few years, we have actually struggled to spend
the whole amount of the budget
allocation, because
as good stewards of the scheme, we need to make sure that we're spending that money
on interventions that will have an impact on reducing claims and
reducing claim costs for levy payers.
And so what we've done is adjusted the budget down more to
match what we're actually spending.
So I think it's gone from something like 60 to
50 million, but it's certainly not halved.
But I would argue that with the reset of
our injury prevention approach, we'll get better value
overall through that 50 million than we were through a
budget number sitting in our internal budget of 60 million.
And can I just... Sorry to interrupt.
Just back to the sensitive claims injury prevention.
I think an important shift with the new Te Ara Oranga
action plan is calling out that all of the
agencies involved in that have a shared responsibility for preventing-
Yeah
... sexual violence. It used to sit with ACC.
We still absolutely take our role seriously, but I think it's
important that we share that now with justice, with police, with
education, with health providers.
Right. So that's a nice segue into my primary question.
Oh, okay.
Or did you want to make a comment on that, minister?
I just have one very quick comment, which might illustrate.
There's obviously a number of injury prevention providers that
ACC funds, and I get a fairly regular update on how
they're tracking, because obviously we want to be spending taxpayer
money on programs that work and that deliver results and that do prevent
injury. And so what I suspect where you're thinking there may be
budget cuts, it may be that programs
have exited because they haven't delivered and
we have a dashboard of all of
these programs, whether or not they're progressing, whether they're under active
management, whether they have exited, or whether they're under review.
So I wonder if you're seeing a reduction in spend could have been because a
program's been discontinued.
Is that publicly available dashboard that you've mentioned?
If not, can we get a copy of it?
I will find out.
Thank you.
We'll follow that one up in post. Minister,
we talked about injury prevention.
You introduced that you've got the delegation for it.
It's something that this committee's heard a lot about in our years of scrutiny
with ACC,
the difference between the management of that through ACC and
WorkSafe, who's responsible for injury prevention, who spends the
money best, how do we see that? Can you talk us through what you're
doing now that you've got that delegation,
and how we expect to see the change with the budget provision for it?
Just if I could, yeah, talk back to the history with,
obviously both ACC and WorkSafe have that statutory
duty to reduce harm in the workplace, and that's under the Harm Reduction
Action Plan. In September 2018, the
two organizations entered into that
10-year partnering agreement, which we all know about.
And then under that agreement, ACC was bringing
$15 million to the table to WorkSafe to deliver on those
injury prevention initiatives.
It has been decided that WorkSafe generally wasn't able to deliver
that injury prevention program to the standard that was expected.
Again, we're very focused on return on investment under this government, as
is the leadership of ACC. So, whilst ACC
stopped funding those programs in March of 2025.
Mm.
No further funding is planned, but the partnership agreement remains in
place, and in the short time I've had this delegation, I've been
satisfied with the way ACC has
uplifted that responsibility and taken it on
to fund other external providers as opposed to another Crown
entity.
And just as a supplementary to that, in terms of
the program of work that you see now within your delegation, within the
allocated budget, what do you see that's different now that
ACC is working on within injury prevention,
that we can hope to see those outcomes roll out from?
I've been really pleased to see funding going to a lot of grassroots
organizations like Farm Strong, like Safe Farms,
work with the Forestry Industry Safety Council.
These unfortunately have been some of the most dangerous
workplaces for New Zealanders to be involved in.
But by these grassroots
organizations get set up and they prove results, and then we
partners with them alongside them and the likes of
the Farm Strong partnership.
We've just renewed it for another five years
because we saw an incredible ROI on that and-
Mm
... we've got to, as much as we talk about ROI, we're talking about people,
real people here. And for every dollar invested,
we're seeing about $7.85
reduction in
treatment and claims. So things like that,
that's equated to nearly $52 million in savings.
So where we can see deliverable
results and proven results, I think they are the kinds of programs that the
agency wants to be looking to be supporting going forward.
Yeah. Wonderful.
The forestry one was impressive.
Yes.
Sure.
So we've got a supplementary question. We'll probably have a few on this.
So Lawrence, you know.
I'm actually happy if Pamji-
Oh, Pamji. Yeah.
Oh, good. Thank you. So ministers, thank you so much for this report that
was provided to us just before this meeting.
Keen to understand from you what is unique in this
report. In the terms of what we
didn't know before. Obviously, the numbers will be different, numbers of people and
dollar value. But is there anything else that is unique from
the insights from 2025, and how the
funding allocations in this budget align with the findings
in this report?
I might get the chief executive to talk to that because I have to say, this is the
first one I've ever seen, so I'm- ... able to compare it to some.
That's us
This type of reporting hasn't been done before.
Yeah.
This is a new-
Yes
...
piece of transparency reporting.
Okay. Good.
That in itself is the answer to your question, really.
Yeah. So just keen to know, because obviously, if you look at the headings, it
seems like we kind of know those things, right?
Well, New Zealanders don't-
No
... we don't believe.
They don't.
I just mentioned to Minister Greig this Forestry Industry Safety Council.
Mm.
Now,
I can remember about 10 years ago,
we were killing, in the forestry sector, about a person a month.
There were about 12 fatalities a year.
Mm.
That is now down to, in the last 12 months, there have been zero.
Wow.
Now, I think that's a tangible
result of collaboration between industry
players on the ground, improved technology, but
with support from ACC and other agencies, and that's a
real success story. Similarly, there was that one about
netball injuries, which was-
Okay. Mm.
A program that has prevented 12,000-
Ooh
... potential netball injuries.
Mm.
Now, I'm not a netballer, but- ... I understand that I had a daughter
that played netball at school, and I understand that it's that
motion of sort of moving forward quickly and coming to a stop that places strain
on your limbs.
Program to play netball.
So a simple program that involves warmup
exercises before you play has a profound and
positive tangible impact. So this is a new report.
It's part of, I think,
an endeavor by ACC to be transparent, not only about
work that they are doing as an agency that is sort of business as usual, but
actually trumpeting some of the success stories.
Right.
Because often we hear
about things that are maybe less than perfect, and that
happens in many agencies of the Crown and state.
But here are some good examples of programs that are working, that are
measurable, and do have a tangible benefit.
Right.
In terms of your question, so why we produced the report, I'm personally quite
proud of this report. We did the first one last year, and
that was really just to put the numbers out there.
But this year-
This is the second one
So this is the second one.
Right.
We'll make sure we do a-
Reapproved. It's approved
... we'll do a special republication of the first one.
But this year we've taken a different emphasis to your
question. This year we actually want to make it more about what
each of us can do in response to it, and so that's why the
cover, I think, says something about, "And what we can all do about it." So we've
changed the focus. For example, we group them in community.
This year we've focused on home because that's where half of our
injuries happen.
Mm.
50% of all our claims are from in and around the home.
And so that is something every New Zealander can do something about.
Mm.
And we actually want it to be a call to action.
So we haven't talked about it yet. I hope we get to.
We've been really focused on turning around rehabilitation
performance. I've spoken in many of these committees about the big
turnaround we needed to do to reverse the decade of
declining rehab rates. So we're really focused on
that. But actually, to make sure the scheme's really sustainable into
the long term, we also need every New Zealander to be doing
what they can. And as I said earlier, I'm a bit of a broken record.
Prevent injuries, and if you're injured, be really active in your recovery.
And so that's the intent of this year's report.
So I'm sure it'll be a bestseller.
Yes. So a quick supplementary on this.
So obviously you didn't see this report before, but as ministers, you will know the
data, right?
Mm-hmm.
So you are confident that the funding decisions made in this budget
align with the findings that are published in this report?
It's probably for the late ministers.
Yeah. I'm happy to respond.
If you want to come back-
Yeah
... that's totally fine.
Yeah.
Because you haven't had a chance to look at the report.
I'm fine with it if you want to come back.
We'll do that.
Yep. Thank you.
Great.
All right.
So what I'll do, we've got a few more supplementaries on this line, and then I'm
just going to check with the committee that we're still where we are with the
primaries following up, because sometimes things change as we go through.
So quick supplementary from Carl and Grant, and we'll move on.
Hello. Thank you.
Oh, you did want yours still?
I did want, but yeah. Because I've asked quite a few questions.
Oh, that's so charitable of you.
Oh, no. I'm happy to answer mine.
Thank you.
Lawrence-
Very nice
... your question was first. You go for it.
No, can't do it. I can go after.
Okay. Thank you.
No. Okay. All right. Gosh, you're too kind to each other. Goodness me.
Go for it, Carl.
In relation to injury prevention, how much
actuarial science are you using in determining
where changes could reduce impact?
Like for example, with the Mountain Safety Council and the
work on the Tongariro Crossing, where there was a move of
the track which reduced injuries significantly as a
result of that. Interested if you've got any of those other examples or you're
intending on doing that sort of work.
So our actuaries are very focused on
injury prevention. And in fact, last year's financial condition
report, which is another great read-
Slightly
bigger than the injuries report, though-
Another bestseller
... called out the need for us to have more impact in injury prevention.
And so that's been a big driver of the new approach we're
taking, working with people who can have the most impact.
And so,
the actuarial view underpins
everything we do.
Great.
Lawrence?
Thank you, Madam Chair. And just to note that my primary is on
injury prevention, so it's covered now under the supplement.
Okay, great.
But also I want to preface to say that- It might look like we have a lot of
concerns, but most of the things that ACC are
doing is great. But then we just have-- wanted to tease out some of the things
that
we may want to address. So in terms of injury prevention, I want to go back
to the original questions I was asking, and
this is the part that I do have some concerns around, is
in the new plan with ACC and the three priorities-
The turnaround plan
... the turnaround plan, there is no mention of
prevention.
I want to check with the minister and maybe the chief executive is,
can I interpret that, for example, action 10, reset ACC's strategic
direction or priorities, at least have it mentioned.
The reason I mention this is if there's not a single mention of
prevention,
then it's not a measure, it's not a target.
So then how then do you-- You're going to have to chase all of the other priorities
that you've mentioned here.
The associate minister's pointed out to me that
prevention is a statutory obligation of ACC.
It's in the leg, so it kind of almost-
Everything
... it kind of goes without
saying. But Megan would have some-
And our service agreement-
Yeah
... does have measures for injury prevention.
Okay.
Yeah.
So that is something that is being continuously measured-
Mm-hmm
... and the select committee, for example, can expect-
So the service agreement, maybe we--
The service agreement is a publicly available document.
Mm-hmm.
So maybe we can provide you with a copy of that as well, because that goes into
a lot more detail-
Yeah
... than a high level report.
Would be helpful because there is also a proposed, I don't know if it's been
actioned, but a proposed cut to the injury preventions team as well.
That
did come out in October last year, but I want to check,
did that happen? Was there a restructure at the prevention-
We did a restructure last year in line with the new
approach.
There may have been a small number of FT reduction, but that wasn't the
purpose of it. The purpose was to reset the team around the new
approach to injury prevention, and it's been
well received by our people. It's working well.
It means that instead of having
team members focused, say, on one particular thing, so we had someone who,
for example, was responsible for Drive, the young drivers program.
We've now got more of portfolio, so we can make sure that we're having an
impact across an area of risk rather than individual
interventions.
Great. Can I just check a following up?
Because I agree, Minister, with what you said before, that when we're
looking at injury prevention, we're actually looking at a culture
shift, and this is a culture that we've had as New Zealanders for
decades, if not centuries.
Mm-hmm.
A very cavalier attitude towards injury.
Can I check--
But at the same time, it's also, in some ways, human nature for us to go, "Well,
we'll do the things that are more urgent."
One of the things you mentioned before, Megan, I know this has been going on for a
little while, which is that we have this always-on approach when it comes to injury
prevention. But always-on, like I said, also means that you leave it to back burner
because it's never really the main thing because you're always responding
to what is the upcoming deadline.
So then how then in going forward you're going to
ensure that all of the staff are trained when it comes to
understanding injury prevention and are able to work because
there's no dedicated focus by a particular
person anymore?
So we definitely still have our dedicated injury prevention team.
I just meant within the team. We have them focused on
portfolios to have more impact for the exact reason you're saying.
And I
guess I can only assure you that it's still absolutely a focus, and
the comment I was going to make is the turnaround plan is about
really turning around rehabilitation performance.
Mm-hmm.
There are a range of other things that we continue to do as a big
organization. And
I guess the assurance I'd give is in the
results you'll see and what you see in this
report is a sign of how focused we
are on injury prevention
right now.
One final step on injury prevention.
Just going into your Interest New Zealand, I really do appreciate the
examples that's been given here and the success stories.
You want to supplement in but-
But that's
one of-
For supplement
... many. So you gave an example of what success looks like in
forestry. Great.
What about construction and manufacturing?
Mm-hmm.
You gave a success story about netball. Great.
There are a lot of other sports.
Yeah.
So
while this is good, what is happening across-- Are we not
then seeing the same level of preventative
measures or the same collaboration in other areas where they don't
result in the same great data?
Mm-hmm.
Can you just walk us through-
Yeah, sure
... some of the other areas?
Oh, we've got a lot of really positive stories.
We might have been constrained by the page limit we set ourselves.
Okay, fair.
And
attention and keeping it succinct.
And so we do have many other really positive success
stories that we share with industry groups and publicly through
social media, which is a big way to reach people, as you'd know.
We've seen the ads.
But on the flip side is we make the difficult decisions when
there's a program that isn't delivering.
So that is, as the associate minister said, that's an
ongoing process. We have many other positive stories, and we have stories
where we haven't seen the impact we've expected.
We work with the provider, we understand what's going on, and then together we
make the decision,
can we turn this around or is this approach just not going to have the
impact we need it to have?
Great. Supplementary, Grant, and then we'll move on to Grant's primary, then we're
back on to Priyanka, and then we'll keep going.
Yeah. I've got a supplementary in this space, particularly focused on ag and
quads.
I've asked this question regularly.
I'm just curious, what space, where have we got to
in terms of injury prevention programs around the safer farms and so forth?
Mm.
Because there are still far too many, well, any death
is no good, but far too many rollover
casualties and injuries in this space.
And what's your approach, and where do you see this heading?
I'll get the chief executive to talk to the operational side of things.
Yeah.
But I think I alluded to earlier,
yes, we are funding Safer Farms-
Yeah
... and Farm Strong and their programs.
I guess to a degree, it's up to them to determine where they want to be
targeting that.
Mm.
And yes, we know there are far too many incidences with quad
bikes. But
as I said earlier, these are partnerships that we see
materially shifting the dial-
Mm
... and delivering results in regards to reducing on-farm
harm and incidences. Safer Farms, as an example,
put $11 million into their Farm Without Harm strategy over
four or five years. Just can't remember exactly how many years.
Four years. Okay.
But it's substantial.
Mm.
Because, again, it delivered results.
But as to the specific programs, that's up to
them to operationalize.
Joan?
Yeah. And we've changed the approach to the refunds for
roll bars.
Yeah.
So we've taken ourselves out of that.
So that's direct through the local
partners.
And I'm going to get myself in trouble here because they're quite famous, the
rugby player turned farmer who is-
Sam Whitelock
Thank you. I knew that.
That Australian accent suddenly got really strong.
As a
very vocal advocate-
Yeah
... for roll bars. And that's about us trying to
influence people's behavior. So we'd love to have as many advocates as
possible-
Mm
... out there advocating for
roll bars.
Role model MP farmers.
Well, I've got both my quads at home have got roll bars on for that reason.
Very good of you, Grant. New primary.
Thank you. Now, Joan, you've mentioned several times, I'd just like to follow up a
bit further on the turnaround plan.
I'm really interested to hear how that's progressing and
the reasons for it. You've been alluding to it.
Particularly, the chair, Jan, you've been obviously
involved in turnaround plans, one recent reports of Auckland.
Mm.
How do you see any
similarities or lessons in how we're getting on in that space?
Do you want to answer, Stewart, or-
Well, I would just before the chair answers that
specific question, I would draw members' attention to this
laminated sheet, which gives some indication of some of the measures.
As Megan and I have talked about earlier in this hearing,
the key factor in terms of the turnaround plan is
about improved rehabilitation-
Mm
... because that's the area that the greatest concern has been
in terms of sustainability of the scheme.
Mm-hmm.
So I now get a dashboard. It actually comes to me every
week with key
statistical data about what's happening, how long people are
involved before they get rehabilitated.
And given the numbers-
Mm
... it's quite important. ACC
engages through
cases with, and forgive me, I should know the number off the top of my head, but
it's 2 million plus a year cases.
Mm.
90 several percent are approved within-
24 hours
... 24 hours. And the vast majority are
returned to independence and rehabilitated very quickly.
But there is a tail of-
Mm
... people who stay in what we call the long-term claims pool.
Mm.
And that number has increased over the last decade or
so. When we drill down into those numbers,
too many in my view of those numbers are cases
that,
as a non-medical person, I would have thought should be able to be rehabilitated
much earlier than they have been in the past.
So one of the things that ACC has done in the last
couple of years has
reinstituted the case manager-
Mm
... model.
And that is starting to have some really positive impact for the
clients and for the people who
need to, want to, and are better served
by being rehabilitated more quickly.
So Jan, maybe if you wanted to-- I think the question was, are there any
similarities between the ports of Auckland and ACC?
This would be a very interesting answer.
Yes, there is.
With the port and ACC, I think the focus
to getting back to what our basic
primary
position is, was really important.
And to have that clarity for all of the people that work for
ACC about what we should be doing, and that's why the
strategy and the turnaround plan have the three
key
areas that we're focusing on.
At the port, we had to make sure people were safe, that
we delivered in the container terminal, and that we delivered for
customers.
At ACC, we've got to get people the care that they need for lasting
recovery on a timely basis and with an effective and
efficient organization.
So all our people, both port and at ACC,
want to do the right thing, and they want to know that they're
contributing to the-
To a successful organization. And I'm really
proud of what the team delivered at both the port but
at ACC in particular, because I think the
metrics that we're seeing have really demonstrated...
And this
started before the turnaround plan, but the turnaround plan really
focused
what the reviews told us, what the minister set out in
his expectations, and then also what we knew we
had to do for a sustainable future.
Thank you. Very helpful.
Right. And we have a supplementary from Vanessa Wanick.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, ministers.
Thank you.
In this
turnaround performance measures, one of the key things where savings have
been made is in elective surgery,
and I note that year to date, $51 million
has been saved. And also, there's been, at the
same time, quite an increase in cost of surgery.
So, with that $51 million,
are we sure that as a whole of society and
overall system, that that's actually a saving?
Or is that going to mean that people are off work for
longer,
and not returning to work? Are we assured that that's what
that is?
Well, one of the key focuses for us is to make sure
people get back to work on a timely basis, but we also have a
responsibility that we
cover injuries-
Mm
... not other surgical requirements.
Mm. Mm.
So, the team have put together a tool which actually
helps us to be much more efficient on analyzing-
Mm
...
the elective surgeries. But
the savings, I think we haven't backed off
on the number of days that people have to wait
before they get elective.
Yeah.
And
look, there
will be some clients who might still
need surgery, but it's not funded by ACC.
But actually, the more significant driver of this saving has been
people who are on review,
didn't actually need surgery in order to recover.
So we've done a lot of work with surgeons around
referrals for surgery.
Mm.
Our own technical and clinical specialists are reviewing surgery
requests
to make sure that the surgery is necessary for the
person's full recovery. And so,
we didn't have a target, to be clear, for elective surgery savings, but
it's coming through a more disciplined approach to
managing requests for surgery.
Mm.
Right. Supplementary, Priyanka Radhakrishnan.
Thanks.
Great to see the focus on rehab and getting people back into
jobs. Targets can be useful.
However, given your pretty high rate
of people getting re-injured, well, that's in
here.
How
will you be measuring and reporting the return to
work bit such that members of the public have
confidence that you're not just
exiting people from the scheme to meet your targets, but that people are actually
getting into real sustainable work,
so that they don't get re-injured and come back in your re-injury figures?
Well,
what
people do after they
are no longer involved with the scheme is kind of beyond the
purview of ACC. So, I'm not sure
that we can provide an answer as to what
decisions and choices and matters people take
in terms of their working professional or day-to-day
life after they leave the scheme. I don't know, Megan, do you want to make
some comment about that?
Yeah. I can, yeah, make a few comments.
Away you go.
So in terms of someone no longer being reliant on
ACC, and we're talking particularly about people receiving weekly
compensation, that's the most obvious measure.
The vast majority of people will just get better and return to work.
So they make the decision that they're fine to go back to work.
They've had their treatment, and that can often be just a couple of
weeks.
For someone to no longer be receiving
weekly compensation where they haven't just gotten better and gone
back to work, there are only three ways that can happen.
We can't just decide to exit someone.
They're either able to return to their job or to a
similar job, that's the most common way.
Or they're still unable to work, but it's no longer to do with their
injury, and often we will have a formal review
process to assess that.
Mm.
And the third way is that they're no longer able to
do their original job, but there are other types of
employment that they could do, and that's through quite a
comprehensive vocational assessment, vocational independence
process that can take over a year to work with someone
to actually understand, given where they're at post-injury, what are
they able to do in terms of getting back into the
workforce. But these
results are the result of more people either getting back to
work or being independent and able to work.
So that's the only way we can do it.
So do you require the employer to give you alternative duties for
someone who can't perform the same job that they were doing?
So that starts with primary care.
So when someone is signed off If they can't
work, they can either be signed off as fully unfit for
work or fit for selected duties. So we've done a lot of work with the
primary care sector, and we've seen some really good
results in terms of an increase in the proportion of medical
certification that ticks the box fit for selected
duties. If that box is ticked, then our case managers
can work with the person and their employer to talk about
alternative duties on the basis that, as I said earlier, getting
back at work, the social connection is really important to recovery.
If that box is not ticked and they're ticked off as
fully unfit, then we can't have that conversation with the
employer. So that's the focus we've had with primary care.
And we're at the highest rate ever of fit for
selected duties, but that's still only sort of low 40%.
And we believe that
should be higher.
If you think about it,
there aren't that many situations that would mean you couldn't be back
at work doing something. So we're continuing to work with primary
care, but we're really pleased in how we've worked together to improve medical
certification.
Great. And supplementary from Carl, then we move on to Priyanka's primary.
Thanks very much, Chair. Minister, this is an area of, I think, concern
where ACC, as you've said earlier, is New
Zealand's ACC. What have you done around holding
people accountable who are misusing
ACC in terms of their return to work,
are deliberately delaying it or doing things in their private
life that, frankly, they could actually be doing if they were at work as well?
Well, the vast majority of New Zealanders do the right thing.
Yeah.
And the vast majority of ACC clients do the right
thing as well. But there are,
sadly, occasionally, people who, for a variety of reasons,
Megan-
Yeah
...
to take advantage of the scheme and its
processes and its facilities.
One of the aspects that has been improved in
the last year or so has been what used to be called the Integrity
Unit, has been renamed the Fraud Unit.
Good.
And there have been some increased resources put
into that.
Yeah.
And so I
guess most New Zealanders would like to think that the right thing was
being done, but there is a need for a scheme like
ACC to have an
integrity/fraud
prevention
unit involved. So I don't know, Megan, if you want to make any comment on that in
terms of the operation of it.
Minister, I think you've covered it off.
I guess just the one thing I would add from our point of view is the
message we give people is that there's no free lunch.
It's not a victimless crime.
Yeah.
And it's all of us as levy payers that are paying
if people do the wrong thing. So we take it very
seriously.
We're quite overt when we have, for example, a
prosecution,
to make people aware that
we do take this really seriously.
And there have been a number of successful prosecutions in the last 12 months.
Some of those have been quite well publicized publicly.
Committee, this will be our last primary question.
So those of you that were in the queue that have your questions, I'm sure we can
send them through as written follow-ups, so we'll get them answered.
I'll hand it over to you, Priyanka.
Thanks, Madam Chair.
I'm just trying to make sense of a few comments that you've collectively made
today.
And the stats show that workplace
injuries in New Zealand are far higher than countries we compare
ourselves with, double Australia, five times the UK.
At the same time, Megan, you were saying that you've struggled to spend
the allocated amount for injury prevention in
workplaces. At the same time, we have organizations
in this space saying that ACC's focus is very narrow on, you've
mentioned Safer Farms. Great program, but it's very narrowly focused on
construction, ag, and forestry. Leaving or
excluding, I guess, other industries like healthcare,
or the aged care sector where injuries are
high. How do you make decisions around where
injury prevention money is best spent, and why aren't some of those other
industries included in your focus?
Well, as minister
involved in an independent Crown entity, that's not a call for me.
Those are funding and operational matters that
ACC staff and officials make. So Megan, but I think, and
also Chair-
But Minister, you just announced increased funding for Safer Farms
... the range of
prevention programs is very wide.
That's why we've identified some here.
But the Associate Minister has indicated she's going to check whether
that list is available. But it's a very
extensive program of prevention across a multiple
range of sectors. Can ACC cover
every possible permutation? No.
But nor actually should it.
That wasn't the question.
That's what it sounded like.
And your government has announced increased funding recently for one particular
program. So
you clearly are making decisions around where the money is best spent,
so why aren't you looking at some of the other industries where rates are high?
Not every industry, I think we all get that.
But what about the healthcare sector?
Well,
off the top of my head, I don't have that information at my fingertips, but I would
be very surprised if there's not a program in that area.
And off the top of my head, I don't know what
we're having right now. But over time, we've done a
range of programs in different sectors.
We, as ACC, will invest where we see
high rates of claims and where we think there's a gap.
Mm-hmm.
Over time, we've done work on, for example, in healthcare lifting.
Lifting. I've seen it in my own electorate.
That's one of the big ones.
Yeah.
I have.
But also, we focus where the cost to levy
payers is the most significant as well.
So we're always-
Sorry to interrupt you, just aware of time.
Is that
then fair to say, the criticism I've heard, if criticism is a bit
harsh, but ACC focuses mostly on physical
injury at the expense of the psychosocial harms.
Is that a fair comment to make?
No.
Okay. Thank you very much for making yourself available to us this morning-
Thank you
... so early.
Yeah.
That was really fruitful and I think follows a lot of what our committee has been
scrutinizing over the years. So really do appreciate it.
Thank you very much.
You'll hear some follow-up written questions from our committee-
Okay
... I believe early next week. Thank you very much.
Thank you, members.
Thank you.
Thanks.
And now we do.
Coffee or whatnot is important.
Later.
Yeah.
We have a little bit of time to follow up with the agency if there are questions,
so feel free with us.
Yes.
In terms of how-
Thank you for joining us, minister.
All
right. We may not need all the time, just usually a chance for us to tie up some
loose ends. So if there are any questions from the committee.
Lawrence, did you have one?
Yeah, and I think it actually follows up from what Bianca just asked, and
we want to check more from a operational and financial
perspective.
Mm-hmm.
Which is around what sort of proportion in terms of the work or
projects or collaborative ACC is doing when it comes to physical
injury versus psychosocial or mental injury.
Because I know that previously,
the reason I ask these sort of questions is I know that previously ACC has had
programs on, for example, suicide prevention in construction and all
of those. Are some of those ongoing? Do you know the proportionality?
I don't know the exact proportion.
Mm-hmm.
And I would also just
say that we do injury prevention
in areas where claims would be covered by
ACC. So they're a limited
range of mental injuries that ACC
provides cover for, and so we would focus on those areas.
And that's, for example, why we do our work in
sexual violence.
Can I just check through you, Chair?
Mm-hmm.
If we put anything as a post-hearing question, would you be able to let us
know with a bit more time?
Is there the data that is-
The problem is the post questions will go to the minister, although the minister
obviously can-
Can delegate, yeah.
Yeah. Try.
Would-
Let's try.
Yeah.
Um.
We'll be able to give you an estimate.
And can I just check, sorry, Chair, this is no longer
relevant to the other question, if that's okay.
Right. It's all right, I will allow it.
One of the interesting things we've found is
around the rehabilitation entitlement for the social rehabilitation
non-serious injuries.
Mm-hmm.
We've seen an increase in funding for that. Can I just check...
But also, I see that in terms of your savings for social
rehabilitation here,
in this beautifully laminated-
A3.
Yep.
It's nice, right?
Yeah. Can I just check, what is driving the increase in cost-
Mm
... for the social rehabilitation non-serious injuries?
Is it just-
Same as
... these things, unless-
Yeah.
So,
as an entitlement scheme, we set our budget each year based
upon the forecast demand. And what we've seen
over the last decade or more is significant increases
every year in our spend on social rehab.
So social rehab is everything except surgery and medical
treatment. So it's a range of things.
Allied health-
Mm
... equipment that you might need at home, housing and vehicle modifications,
home and community support, residential care.
So it's quite a
broad-
Mm
... category. And we will always
provide those supports to seriously injured clients, often for the rest
of their life. But where we've seen the big growth over the last
10 plus years is in what we call these less serious
injuries, sprains and strains, and other injuries that you'd expect to resolve.
For example, we've seen housing modifications for people with
what appear to be less serious injuries.
So in response to that, as part of the turnaround plan,
we've had a whole
program of work focused on looking at the
individual client and what they need in order to
return to work or independence, and making sure that we've got that right.
And I would say when we do these reviews, sometimes we find the person needs
more.
Mm.
But what we've found is often they need less.
And an example might be someone who initially needed 20 hours a
week of home help, home support.
Mm.
But actually, 18 months on, they only need three hours.
Yeah.
And so by reinvesting in one-to-one case
management, we've now got the capacity to be doing those ongoing
reviews.
Good.
And so that's the driver of being able to
essentially rein in the spend. It's
through better managing and better supporting clients.
And just one final question, Chair.
I know that right in the beginning, we asked you about the ACC's
concerns around the health and safety, and there was some forecasting.
I don't want to know the amount, but I'm just curious to know-
With something like that, what
ACC account does it normally come out of?
Would you know?
Sorry, you're talking about workplace injury?
Yeah. So you know how in the beginning of our hearing we talked about-
Yeah
... the changes to the Health and Safety at Work Act, et cetera, and the-
And work, yeah
... what account would that
money-
Work
... work account?
Mm-hmm.
Okay. Thank you.
Right. Supplementary, Priyanka Radhakrishna.
Yeah. So I was wanting to get a better understanding of some
of the drivers for non-serious injury.
I think you've answered a bit of that.
Also keen to get a sense of whether...
This is an area that has doubled over the last decade from
what I've seen, or weekly compensation for non-serious
injuries.
Is it that the volume of non-serious injuries has
increased, or has the cost for each of them
increased significantly? Where exactly?
So partly it will be the reviews that you've mentioned, which is why the case
management is being brought in. But what are some of the other drivers
that you've seen in terms of the increase in cost?
The price and volume. Mm-hmm.
Both?
Mm.
Right.
Okay.
What evidence do you have... And also,
keen to get a better understanding of how decisions were made.
So if you're saying that there's been an increased investment in case management
to make these reviews, to figure out if someone's getting the type
of care that they need, and to move them on if they don't need it.
Right.
How are these decisions being made before?
And one of you mentioned AI earlier on.
Can you give us a clearer understanding of when automation is used to
make decisions?
So
deal with the last part first. Automation's used to deal with the
2.1 million claims we get a
year, and
basically, we auto-approve over
90% of those. So in a way it's not
AI, but it is auto-approving. If we didn't have
that, then you would be deluged with the
sheer volume of claims.
Huge.
We do not use AI or automation to decline claims.
All of those are done as a result of a human review,
clinically advised.
So it's not AI sitting there declining anything.
Cool. Question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah. Just following up again from the quad bike
issue.
Are you seeing any progress in this space,
basically is what it comes down to, in terms of deaths and injury?
Are the programs you're funding making a
difference?
Yes, because otherwise we wouldn't fund them.
And-
Because the blunt answer-
Have you got information to demonstrate that?
Yeah.
So, in the case of our program for
young drivers. So young drivers, in particular young male
drivers-
Mm
... are over-represented in serious injuries and fatalities.
So we have our Drive program.
Yeah.
And we see, and the number's in the report, I think it's something
like a, I won't make it up or maybe I'll try, a 28%-
Mm-hmm
... reduction in injuries
with young drivers who've done the Drive program.
Similarly, with our motorcycle Ride Forever course, a
significant reduction in injuries from motorbike riders who've
done that course. And in fact, we're now
giving a
motorcycle
levy reduction to people who've done the program because it's so
compelling
that it's having an impact. And so, these are the
things that we want to do more of. We want every young driver to drive-
Yeah. I think you'll find some of the accidents on farm are often people
my generation. Quite genuinely.
Dammit.
Quite genuinely, who just chill, bro
attitude to riding a quad, for example.
Is that Generation X?
We-
No.
Yeah.
Boomer. Thank you very much.
A boomer.
Yeah.
That was a patsy.
And yeah.
We can check whether-
Just, yeah
... we've got data showing
whether a quad bike has a roll bar on it. I'm actually not sure.
I can't imagine we would collect that information.
But that's what we would need to collect to know.
I just want to know, in terms of the overall, though, from that sector-
Yeah
... are we actually seeing reductions
in the number of rollovers and deaths?
Because they're still regularly-
We-
You still regularly read about them in the-
Yeah, we can get you that information.
Because it's a real-
I think one is too many.
100%.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Let's get the stats. Great. And a final little question from Lawrence.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just want to follow up because I think the
intergenerational thing is really interesting to me.
Mm-hmm.
Yes.
You talked about injury being a cultural
shift.
Mm.
But what we're also seeing is, for example, youth fatality rate, et cetera.
Are you seeing a generational shift in how New
Zealanders think about injury prevention,
or are we seeing young people with the same risky and cavalier
attitude?
Mm.
We might need to come back to you on-
Yeah
... what we collect in terms of the age, because we do quite a bit of
surveying of the population.
Mm.
And we look at it by ethnicity and
geographically. But I'm not sure-
That would be really helpful
... if we capture the age of someone to get a
sense of how those attitudes shift.
Yeah, I would be really keen to see.
In fact, I think-
That would help with-
I think we do
... ongoing work of ACC.
Yes. And I think you highlighted the fundamental issue for ACC, and
actually for New Zealanders, is personal responsibility.
And
we can do all the injury prevention
activities that we like, but if somebody wants to do-
Something silly and not have a hymn.
Yeah.
Or
climb up a ladder that's not secure, et cetera.
No programs can overcome that, but that's the whole point of
the injury document that you've got.
Mm.
Of our programs, of our social media
coverage, is to try and get New Zealanders to take personal
responsibility.
Yeah.
Mm.
Great. And a final sup from
Priyanka. I did say Lawrence's was last, but
Yeah.
Thanks. I'll be quick. I see in that bit of
the report which looks at young people, you've also said there's an increase in
growth in claims from the Asian community.
What can you tell us about that?
Yeah. It's an area we're really interested in.
We still have a lower rate of claim
as a percentage of the Asian population compared to the non-Asian population.
I think 21% of the Asian population
claims versus 29% of non-Asian.
But until we understand the prevalence of injury, it's hard for us
to start to understand why. So this year, very
exciting, for the first time, we will have a question in the New Zealand Health
Survey this year asking people if they've had an injury.
And so we can then use the IDI to compare how many people
said they've had an injury that resulted in more than a week off work compared
to claim rates. So that will help us collectively to
understand differences in claim rates
between different parts of the community.
Great. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
The extra time, we appreciate.
Yes.
Brilliant.
Thank you.
We'll see you in December.
All right.
Good morning, everyone.
Good morning.
Ministers, officials, morning again.
Thank you very much for being here.
We've got an hour and 10 minutes with you as the Minister
for
Workplace Relations and Safety.
That really leaves us with about three and a half, four minutes for introductory
remarks, so you'll give me a little signal of some kind.
And we'll leave that to you, and then we'll go to questions afterwards.
So thank you very much.
Fabulous. Well, thank you Madam Chair and members of the committee.
Good morning. I hope it's been a great start to the day, and Jan, I just saw
you at the other committee-
Hello
... so I'm amazed to see you in this one.
Good job.
The Workplace Relations and Safety portfolio plays a
critical role in New Zealand's economy.
It shapes the conditions for how businesses grow, how people work,
and how confident both can be in the system that supports them.
My focus as Minister has been on ensuring these settings work in
practice, not just in theory. That means making sure our
laws are clear, workable, and support the government's goals
for growth.
A key priority for this government is progressing reform
through the Employment Leave Bill, which will replace the Holidays Act.
The current system has become overly complex and difficult to
apply. For employers, this has created significant
compliance challenges. For workers, it has led to
confusion and in some case, incorrect entitlements.
This reform is about fixing what really matters.
It will introduce a simpler, more transparent system that makes it
easier for employers to get calculations right from the outset,
and for workers to clearly understand what they are entitled to.
Wasting resources on complicated procedures doesn't do workers
or business any favor. By improving clarity
and reducing errors, we will build greater trust in the system and
deliver more consistent outcomes for everyone.
Importantly, this work also supports a broader objective,
giving businesses the confidence to focus on growing and creating
opportunities.
When businesses have that confidence, they are better positioned to hire,
invest, and create more and better paid jobs.
I do recognize that change is hard, but trying to keep everyone
happy is a recipe for the complexity and unintended consequence
that have bedeviled the status quo.
Alongside this, I'm progressing reform of the health and safety
system to restore clarity and common sense to our
framework. I've heard consistent feedback that duties
are not always well understood, and that too much effort can be
directed towards compliance for its own sake, rather than
towards improving outcomes. My approach is straightforward.
We can maintain strong protections for workers while ensuring
obligations are clear, proportionate, and focused on managing the
risks that cause the most harm.
The Health and Safety at Work Amendment Bill strengthens this
focus by clarifying responsibilities and ensuring effort is
directed where it makes the greatest difference, keeping people safe.
It also supports a more consistent and constructive role for the regulator,
so that businesses and workers alike can have confidence in what good looks
like.
Greater certainty in the system will support better decision-making and more
effective risk management across workplaces.
Finally, I've been looking closely at how the employment relations
system operates in practice, particularly in relation
to dispute resolution. Disputes are inevitable,
but the way they are handled has significant consequences.
What I've heard is that the current system can be slow,
costly, and uncertain. That has real impacts on
individuals, on workplace relationships, and on business
confidence. Lengthy and unresolved disputes can discourage
hiring, delay investment decisions, and create unnecessary
strain for everyone involved. That is why I'm focused on
ensuring disputes are resolved as early as possible and without
disproportionate cost. I have sought direct feedback from New
Zealanders on their experiences with the dispute resolution
system, including the role of employment advocates.
This will provide a clear evidence base to inform the next phase
of improvements. Our goal is a system that is
efficient, predictable, and supports constructive outcomes,
giving both employers and employees confidence to move forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm very happy to take questions.
Also recognizing we've got a panel of experts with us here too,
who I'm hopeful will also be able to help elucidate more answers.
Brilliant. Thank you very much, and it's very much been our approach
so far, so we will. Our first question is from Teanau Tuiono.
Thank you, Minister. Thank you for as
us.
I'm sure you're aware of the comments made by the Pike River families this morning
on
how, and how bloody angry they are about this bill.
And so I wanted to hear some of your reflections on that.
And within that same interview, I did note the comments from
the Institute of Safety Management spokesperson, Mike Hosking, who
said that this is a dog's breakfast of a bill.
And so I hear your comments around making this
clearer, et cetera, et cetera-
Yeah
... but
it doesn't appear to be so.
We took a different view than the committee, in terms
of this bill moving through the house.
I think this bill will lead to more confusion.
That is what they are saying out there in the sector.
So what do you say about what's been said out there this morning in terms of-
Well, thank you for the question. Look, in the time between getting
from the GAC committee to here, I did have the chance to very
briefly read some of the commentary this morning
on RNZ. And I must admit, I
am continually confused by what appears
to be a disconnect between myself and the Pike River families,
where I believe we actually have quite a lot of overlapping interest.
And I'd reiterate what I mentioned in my meeting with them last year,
that I do believe there is quite a lot of alignment.
We are not changing a single regulation when it comes to
mining. What we are doing is ensuring that
for a lot of people out there who have been asking for clarity under the
law,
to actually be able to prioritize what it is
that they need to do at work, which is to focus on critical risks.
Now, whether you are a big company or a small company, the
requirement under the law will be focus on what will
lead to critical risks, the things that will lead to death, serious
injury, and illness, and prioritize those.
The critical risk test builds on the existing approach
to risk management that happens under the current law.
As PCBUs already do, they
identify all workplace hazards that could give rise to health and
safety risks. But what we know, when I've been out there talking
to people in a variety of sectors, there is confusion as
to what they should actually be doing, because that's so broad.
And now anybody who's been involved in leadership, and I'm sure there
are a couple in this room, you know that when you're involved in
business, there's so much that you have to do, and you have to
prioritize. And when it comes to health and safety, we
haven't been asking people before to prioritize.
We've been asking them to manage everything.
But if you did that across all business systems and said, "Just manage everything.
Don't prioritize what it is that you actually want to achieve today, this week,
next month, next fortnight,"
you wouldn't get anywhere. So we're asking all businesses, no matter what size they
are, prioritize all the actions that will lead to death, serious
injury, and illness. So I don't believe there is actually this
disconnect that I'm picking up on. I think there is quite a lot of alignment.
I'm just sorry that it's not coming across in the media.
No, it's not. So what is your answer to Mike
Hosking, who works in this area from the Institute of
Safety
Management-
Mm-hmm
... when he did call it a dog's breakfast,
and his concerns that actually most of the injuries are
24% within small businesses. I hear you talking
about clarity, and I hear you talking about the lack of confusion,
but straight out the gate,
this is leading to more confusion.
And my concern is when you're going to have a work
site where people are going to have to grapple whether they're falling within the
definition or not within the definition, you've got multiple businesses in one
spot, it is going to lead to confusion.
And I don't see anything in your work program which will be able
to actually rectify this.
Well, I tend to disagree with the member, but I'd make a few
comments.
Look, there is a range of views within the business
community and within people who deal with health and safety on the ground.
I would simply look at some alternative views.
So if I take the health and safety reform survey that Site Safe
did last year, which is looking at not just big business,
but small guys, people based in construction importantly as well.
They went out to their 6,000 members-
And to people involved with
SiteSafe and ask them what it is that they thought of with
these reforms, what is it that they actually want?
Now, 85% of respondents
agreed that there needed to be more focus on critical risks.
95%
of respondents
agreed that there should be clearer guidance available.
That is also a focus that we've been asking from WorkSafe.
So we're making a prioritization within the law on
critical risks. We've asked WorkSafe to prioritize guidance.
95% of those respondents agreed that there should be more use of
approved codes of practice. Once again, within this law,
we're shoring that up, and WorkSafe are currently undergoing pilots when
it comes to industry-led approved codes of practice, which will be welcomed
by people in that community.
69% believed that the WorkSafe enforcement operating model
should change, and I tend to agree, which is why the bill, as well as what we've
done operationally within WorkSafe, has changed to allow
people more access to guidance before we go straight to the stick.
Providing the carrot before the stick.
As well as 59% of these respondents
agreeing that small, low-risk businesses should have fewer obligations
under the law. And I tend to agree, because for small,
lower-risk businesses, they don't have that same risk of
harm of actions that will lead to death, serious injury, and
illness that a large, complex, risky
organization would have. And so I would suggest
that there are a lot of different views within the sector,
and this is quite supported by small businesses
in particular, as well as low-risk businesses, but that our focus
here for all of us should be on how do we ensure that
people are coming home to their families, at the
end of each workday. And we know that too many people are dying at work.
Too many people are being seriously injured.
But once again, coming back to that prioritization question, if we
ask all people to do all things and it's not clear, no one is
going to know what it is that they need.
So in the absence of true clear
guidance of these approved codes of practice of WorkSafe
prioritizing guidance, there's been an industry born out of
health and safety consultants. Now, I am not surprised that people who get
paid a lot of money to provide companies with health and safety
advice might be against these reforms, because the idea
behind the reform is that people don't need to ask for
as much expensive advice.
I think I take exception that people who are in that sector are just doing it for
the money. I don't think that's an appropriate assertion, Minister.
And if I can
ask a couple more supps.
Yeah.
Just around the non-critical stuff. You started talking about non-critical risks.
What about the criticisms that this is going to shift the burden to already loaded
ACC?
And so we have had ACC come out and say, well, actually, the bill
itself, from their perspective, is fit for purpose.
This will actually shift that responsibility, some of it, to
ACC, and actually the taxpayer's going to have to foot the bill,
as opposed to small businesses actually upping their
game and making sure that they do the work that is necessary to make sure that
workers are safe.
I disagree that that will be a result of this reform.
Look, I don't have any particular statistic because I do understand that it
is near impossible to try and model what the effects on
ACC would be from this reform. And if I walk you through just a
couple of-
I think it's around about 3.6 billion at the moment from-
Sorry, did you want the answer, Teanau?
Sure.
Thank you. So if I walk you through a couple of scenarios that
could play out, you have the issue here of if it works
as intended, there will be actually fewer people who would need
ACC help for very serious injuries, and we
know that the cost to ACC for people being off work
for a substantive amount of time for very serious, complicated injuries
is a substantial cost. Now, if we have people
focusing on the critical risks, as we've been intending, if we have
the guidance coming out from WorkSafe so businesses know what they need to do, as
well as WorkSafe also upping their inspector capability, which
they are doing for some of our high-risk areas, and we're asking
them to focus on those high-risk issues and areas of agriculture,
construction, manufacturing,
and they are proactively going out and investigating those
areas currently under my direction and under the good work
of the chief executive sitting here to my left.
It is possible that over time we end up with fewer costs to ACC
from these very high hazard areas, which would be of a benefit to ACC.
However, you could also make a whole range of other assumptions
based on the fact that we are dealing with hundreds of thousands
of individuals who in any moment could potentially have an
accident.
I have been given an understanding from my officials that it is near impossible to
try and model that, so I'd take it with a grain of salt what would
be the overall impact on ACC, but the goal here is
admirable, and the work that we have in place is also
working on the ground, and we have industry involved already in
producing ACOPS, which will provide more guidance.
So I once again just take the point of what is it that the
opposition is actually opposed to here.
If you look at the last government, what did they do on
health and safety?
Zilch. Nada, nunca, nothing.
Nothing.
This government actually cares about people coming home at the
end of each day, which is why we have prioritized a reform to health and
safety.
I can't point to a single thing that the previous government did to actually
help people in health and safety.
Okay. So we have further supplementaries from you, Tiana.
Otherwise, we-
I should stop holding the mic.
Okay. Jan's got a supplementary on this, and then we've got
Actually, I'll just address that last point, Minister.
You know very well that on your desk when you came in as minister were the
regulations that were sitting there for plant and safety at
work. So, that is actually a very incorrect statement and needs
correction.
That was put on hold by the previous government.
That was on your desk ready for approval when you came in as
minister. But Minister, you brought up
WorkSafe, and you talked about their survey.
Now, WorkSafe did appear before this committee during
the select committee stage.
Mm-hmm.
And actually, that wasn't exactly what they said, and I have since met with
them because they asked for a meeting with me around the fact that they were
concerned around this bill and had huge concerns that it wasn't going to
achieve what is intended
there, and particularly around the two-tier system, which
they see as being really detrimental to
health and safety at work and have huge concerns about.
Minister, my question around this then is, what is the
monitoring that is going on here and will happen and needs
to
be there pretty much straight away?
And
if this bill is failing straight away in achieving the
three of its objectives of simplicity, clarity, and reduced harm,
will you, on behalf of the government, commit to repealing
the amendment bill that you are putting through at the moment,
given that you have just said that seeing people coming
home safe at the end of the day is your number one priority?
If that is not happening,
what is your commitment? So, I'm asking about the monitoring and your
commitment going forward.
It's a hard commitment you're asking me, Jan, given I'm not coming back in the next
government.
So, I think you need to direct that to-
That was on behalf of the government
... the current government. I see.
Yeah.
Look, I think you need a little bit more optimism.
There is a genuine goal that we are looking for here, which is that more
people end up coming home safe at the end of each day.
That we have businesses who actually understand what it is that is
required, which is why we're focused on prioritizing ACOPS, which is
why we're focused on prioritizing the fact that WorkSafe
will actually provide more guidance, and it will be helpful guidance.
When it comes to...
Sorry, you'd have to remind me what the first part of your monitoring-
What is the monitoring?
Ah, the monitoring.
Yes. So, I can always pass over to our
chief executive for WorkSafe when it comes to what activities they'll be doing on
the ground. There is one area in particular that I'm very keen on
monitoring, which is the area which I know we haven't been meeting as a
current target, which is the guidance that
people on the ground actually find useful from WorkSafe.
I'm very hopeful that this will improve over time, but I believe that we're in
alignment on this front. But very happy for Sharon to talk further
about that area of work.
Yeah, certainly. So look, we look to a few different lead indicators where we
looked at the effectiveness of our efforts on the ground with
PCBUs and lead indicators that we can actually see if we're
making a shift. So, one of the ones we look at are, did businesses make
a change after we were out with them?
We know that 95% of businesses do make a change at the moment where we've
recommended and talked to them about that.
And we also know that 73% say that we helped them,
72%, sorry, say that we helped them find practical ways to lift health
and safety in their business. We also look at the tone, I
guess, of our inspectorate visits.
Are they engaging, and are they collegial?
And we know that 86% of people that we visit
and have an assessment with say that they're satisfied.
Mm-hmm.
Just picking up on the point about guidance, so we have a measure in
our SPE and our SOI, I think at the moment, about guidance, and
we are just short of that. But I did want to give a bit of context
because the measure measures people who are either very satisfied or
extremely satisfied with our guidance.
So, it's very much a stretch. Who loves our guidance?
Mm-hmm.
When we look at people who find it useful, very useful, or extremely useful,
that's over 95%. So, we have a wide range
of guidance. We're not shying away from we could have more.
There's still some areas that we could cover.
There's still some areas where industry can add value and help us create
more current and meaningful guidance.
So, as the minister mentioned, we do have a very big work program around
guidance and establishing some of those ACOPS.
Further supplement?
With respect-
Mm
... that doesn't answer what's going to happen with monitoring
after this bill is
presumably going to be passed in the house to
minimize workplace accidents, serious accidents, and
fatalities at work.
This is something that you said is a goal, and I believe should be a goal
across
parliament,
that we should be minimizing that.
Hearing that people are satisfied is
not answering
around what this bill is going to achieve or should achieve in your
mind. Yeah. So, as part of the bill, I believe there is still a
requirement for notifiable incidents.
But I might ask, is it Hayden?
We'll ask Hayden.
Hayden.
And I'll just start as well-
Yeah
... while Hayden's
Coming up. Just we are-
Hayden, you can start
From a policy perspective, we will continue to monitor obviously the end outcomes.
So you have a range of indicators that you're looking at.
Of course.
So you certainly want to look at the end outcomes, which is ultimately, levels of
harm in the workplace. And then
you've also got to go right back to what are those lead indicators, which is where
what Sharon was talking about. There are 11 non-financial performance
measures that will continue to be monitored by WorkSafe
and that we will be looking at as well. What do you want to add to that, Hayden?
That's pretty comprehensive, but I think also
notifiable incidents, which are not always
harm, but sometimes it's a notification of near misses that have been made to
WorkSafe-
Right
... we'll track those. And we're also doing some work
to try and figure out what a better measure of
injury severity is.
Because if you just use ACC stats, that can be
driven by the performance of the health system or
ACC's rehabilitation performance, which drives the amount of time
someone's off work potentially, and not the severity of the injury.
Absolutely.
So we're doing some work in EV, and with WorkSafe about it, to try and figure out
if we can find a really good measure to
track what
has happened with severity of injuries, not just number of injuries.
Because I think
recent trends have been
the number of injuries hasn't actually been increasing, but the time
off work has.
So there's something about the performance of the health system,
the ACC system, and the overall economy that is quite
hard to get to the bottom of.
And then, well, again, I'll just add that it is parts of a system, and I think
that's where the minister was talking about the different aspects.
So it is right from the operationally,
how is WorkSafe shifting to more of that, helping people
understand what they need to do to comply,
through to the clarity of focus on the critical risks, through to having
these approved codes of practice which provide better
clarity about what it is you need to do and having a legislation
and a safe harbor, effectively, if you've covered those.
So it's all about trying to create clarity,
but with a system view, and we'll need to have measures that look across those.
Okay.
We have another supplementary from Panjit Parmar. Thank you.
So Minister, clearly the current system hasn't been working.
So with this new role of WorkSafe-
Mm-hmm
... of prioritizing a clear and actionable advice to be provided,
I want to understand from you how funding in this budget 2026 is going to
reposition WorkSafe to deliver that as for this kind of
new mandate.
Oh, thank you for the question. Look, there hasn't been any substantial change in
the budget for this financial year.
However, the good news is that unlike
previous years where there was
clearly lots of deficit and financial mismanagement
occurring, under the watch of our chief
executive, Sharon, over here, we have actually seen a return
to surpluses, which is useful. However,
on that, there is also a technical deficit,
I believe, baked in because there is work underway to
strengthen monitoring functions.
But I'm happy for Sharon to talk about what work is actually
underway for that proportion of next year.
Yeah, sure. So, the minister's absolutely right.
So we are operating within our baseline for our BA business.
We originally forecast that we would use some of our
reserves to deliver the strategic program.
As of the last few days, a provision that we had set aside for
Holidays Act has come in lower than we thought.
So we will actually achieve a break-even position
against our baseline, having funded our strategic investment this year.
Mm-hmm.
So, we're very happy with our financial position-
That's great
... and we're forecasting long-term sustainability based on the work we have
underway.
That's great. Which is great.
Thank you.
And if I can just add, this is a more of a technical point, but quite
exciting for some of us-
Mm-hmm
... which is there's a new multi-category appropriation as well, which provides
greater transparency about the different parts of
WorkSafe's operations. So we think that will be very helpful.
And also, Sharon, you did mention you've been able to actually get more
funding to the front line by the sorts of
savings that you've been able to make in other parts of the business, so I think
that's an important point too.
Thank you, Nick. Yes, that's absolutely right.
We've shifted more into our inspectorate.
Thank you. Supplementary-
Very quick, Nick, you mentioned the multi-category appropriation because this is
quite a new thing, Minister, you introduced.
So is there any measure of how it's performing?
Are you able to provide any insight into that?
Yeah, I'm happy to give a bit of insight into why I went down
this route and then hopefully Nick can talk to the particular proportions
of it, because I don't have that one in front of me.
But ultimately, through the term of government,
I became increasingly frustrated with being unable to
identify where the money was actually being
spent, whether there was prioritization of
guidance, of inspectorate functions, or whether it was
going into the back office because it was all just one big collective pool of
money.
Mm-hmm.
As part of our changes for this financial
year,
there are now different buckets of money based on enforcement or
guidance. But I'm happy for Nick, who's actually got the specifics to go
through those.
Yeah. So it splits out the different functions right from engaging to
support best practice, and that's actually 51% of the funding.
So you can see that real focus on ensuring and helping
businesses comply. And then the other main categories are enforcing
compliance and authorizing and monitoring work, as well as industry
safety and major hazards facilities.
Now, those appropriations will also have measures against them.
Some of those measures we talked about earlier as part of an overall
monitoring approach.
Thank you
Great. And a supplementary question from Taino Tuiono.
Yeah. I was wondering if you could, Minister, maybe your officials could kind
of walk us through so it's clear
for the committee, but also for
people watching at home, exactly the process.
I did hear there's going to be these guidelines.
You've been putting stuff out, and there's 97% approval, et cetera.
So I want to know a bit more about that and actually whether someone
liking something-
Hmm
... is enough or is there other things that you've got attached to there as
well? And also some more on those indicators that was just talked
about earlier as well.
At the end of the day, I think both sides of the House want to make sure
that people come home safely. That's what we want.
And if that doesn't happen, then we need to actually need to look at the
system. So if you could walk that through for me so that it's a lot more clearer,
and in particular around those indicators, but also what
happens if things get worse. What happens if the prediction that you're making that
this is going to make things better for people isn't going to happen?
What are the contingencies in place,
where you can move quickly to make sure
that people are safe?
Mm-hmm.
Do you have a list of the different performance indicators anywhere?
I don't have the full list in front of me, but some of those will be in the
estimates, and then some of them will be in WorkSafe annual report.
We can absolutely get a full list of the measures that are being tracked.
And what happens if those indicators are bad?
So what's the-
I'd have to take it away and talk to-
Is this a multi-category appropriation going to kick in and you're going to be able
to fund more frontline inspectors or something?
I kind of want the process spelt out so that-
Yeah
... it gives the committee comfort that
this has been thought through, and also comfort for people at home.
Sure. I can talk to that operationally.
So
Nick's right, we have all the measures and our outcomes framework set out in our
accountability documents. So you'll see those there.
And the system measures, of course, belong to all of us.
We are part of a much broader system.
And so when we look at long-term fatality and
serious harm rates, we are obviously a big part of that, but so are businesses
and employers, et cetera, and other players in the health and safety
system.
So
I'll sort of start by talking about how the results have gone over the last few
years and then talk about how that works in play if we're seeing some shifts.
So we're seeing over the last 10 years, fatalities have come down 30%
and serious non-fatal injuries come down 20%.
So we know that as a country, we are trending very well and consistently in
the right direction.
If we see any variation happen in our data,
we have an intervention design team that would look at that, see what's shifting.
Typically, it happens over time. So we see what's shifting, we work with industry
to understand the cause, and we will have an intervention.
We might target our assessments in that industry for a short time.
And you'll see some of the forestry
harm rates are an excellent example over the last 10 years, where
the whole industry, led by some really strong industry players like
Baker and Fisk, have joined up with workers and businesses and WorkSafe,
and we've had a continual program to bring down harm in that area.
So where we see something that's not working as well as it could, if we see
something where the trend is changing, we work alongside industry
and it becomes part of our day-to-day operation.
And I'll just add, this is part of the policy function as well,
is to be monitoring the classic problem definition.
So we'll be looking for where there are issues.
You're monitoring those sectors and what the trends are by sector, and
whether that means there's more effort needed in a particular area, whether that's
operationally or whether there's something needed from a policy perspective.
Yeah. But just adding to that as well, I was just recently in
Singapore, meeting up with my counterparts who deal with health and safety law
over there, and I also put to them the same issue of, are there any
particular measures that you can track over time?
And the answer came back as
it's actually far too complicated to have one particular measure to point to.
But really, it comes down to individual industry-led
areas of work and the particular measures that they determine for their own
industry groups. Which I also believe, which is why we've gone down the route of
having industry-led ACOPS, because ultimately, you can have as much
input from government as you want, but it has to be led from
on-the-ground culture change.
Mm-hmm.
And what I genuinely do believe will happen here is that we
have approved codes of practice being led by industry.
There'll be a desire from the industry to have fewer incidents of
harm.
There'll be more guidance provided through those industry groups to
people, as well as from WorkSafe, about what it is that people need
to do to comply with the law, but that compliance is actually
linked to minimizing harm. It's not just complying for tick a box.
It is genuinely about-
Yeah
... reducing harm. And I think that
we've got to get away from this pessimistic mindset that everything is going to be
dreadful.
The law, as it stands, allows for more industry
participation. It allows for more union as well as
worker, as well as business groups being
involved in setting what those on-the-ground standards will
be, which means it's not being set from the top, it's being set from the
ground level and will therefore have more participation
rates.
Thank you. Supplementary question from Vanessa.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you, Minister.
I appreciate the involvement of the industries and
the ACOPS and that way of thinking, and also the
guidance being issued. The balance would be the
requirement for inspectorate and to have, if you like, the
consequences for not following. Can you assure us, and the
public, that that function of WorkSafe is still going to be
there and will be supported and well-resourced?
Absolutely.
Look, under this term of government, there's the highest
number of inspectors ever.
This is, I understand,
targeted to increase from here as well, because there has been a real
focus on making sure that we have not just a number of
inspectors, but also highly capable inspectors as well.
So there's been a push to making sure that they have more on-the-ground training
under this watch of this government.
But aside from that, it's really important that we do have
enforcement measures as well, because what this government is
really pointing to is we do need to work in good faith with business and with
workers, that when they are genuinely saying they don't know what it is that they
need to do to comply, we help them, and we provide the guidance
documents. Industry provide the approved codes of practice.
There is help on the ground. But we don't
assume bad faith. But where there is genuine
negligence, that that should be enforced.
It absolutely should be enforced, because we don't want people getting away
with not caring about health and safety. It is important.
Health and safety is important. Genuine negligence will
be enforced, but we have to have the idea or the
presumption of good faith at the start, not that everybody is negligent
and a bad faith actor.
We have a supplementary from Jan Tinetti.
Thank you. Just going back to Sharon, what you said about
workplace deaths. Your website was down when I was looking up this,
and so I want to ask a retrospective question to then look
at going forward.
How many workplace deaths occurred in 2025?
Because I couldn't find that with your website.
I think it's still provisional.
Right.
I don't think we have that number confirmed yet because we need to run through an
investigation often to finalize that number.
So the numbers you've seen there are the latest confirmed numbers.
That-
Going to look backwards and make sure that's right.
That would align with what I have, too.
Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. So Minister,
to you then, are you confident that
the numbers that are being reported around workplace deaths are
comprehensive,
inclusive of everything?
I've never been given any pause for thought in terms of the
factual inaccuracy of numbers.
So the concern that I have is,
does that cover things like work-related suicide?
That would be a question for our technical experts.
Do we have someone who-
I don't know the answer to that, offhand
... No, it doesn't.
There we go.
Got it.
Would only really be where that has been a very clear
finding, and usually as part of a coronial finding, where there would have to be
absolute certainty that it was a suicide that had arisen purely from
work
causes. We have looked at the proportion
of
suicides that are likely to be work-related.
But to get to that point of being able to definitively count it in our deaths,
we have not yet.
It's not completely off the table, but it's very rare that they do make it
onto our count of fatalities.
So does it include all work-related deaths occurring on the road?
Where we've worked through whether it was arising
from the action of the business, yes, it does.
But it sounds like it's actually not as simple as it sounds.
Sometimes,
there's a large truck and whether the truck has caused the accident as opposed to
just being the thing that a member of the public
crossed the line into.
Mm.
So we do have to
really look into the details of each incident.
So it sounds like there's a bit of work to be done there because it doesn't sound
comprehensive,
that it includes everything.
It is actually. It is comprehensive.
It's comprehensive.
So we have standard measures that we measure year on year, so they're definitely
comparable.
Just while we're on that, too, so they don't always compare with overseas measures.
So the UK, for instance, doesn't include any transport measures.
But ours have been steady and stable the way we've measured for a number of
years, so we can be certain when we look at trends that we're comparing apples with
apples.
And this is Statistics New Zealand as well, who works with you.
That's exactly right.
So they-
Thanks, Nick.
Okay. So when you're saying that you've got provisional numbers at the moment,
roughly about when do those numbers become more solid?
They can take two years because of coronial inquests and processes of
investigations. So the number you can always find for the
day is uncertain until it, it can take quite a
long time to settle down with evidence hearings and things.
How much does that change?
It would be a minuscule number, one or two.
So that's why I think that the trend data is better to look at in a
longitudinal,
because the numbers, they're high and they're tragedies, but they are
actually a reasonably small number, and one or two can make quite a difference.
Mm. The only reason I'm asking is going back to that question that I asked
about monitoring.
When are we going to have solid
evidence of whether the bill is making a difference or not?
And that's a rhetorical question.
It's just that that's the whole reason we need that data,
and going back to the fact of when does the government
decide that this isn't working.
Well, I think the technical answer to your question then, coming off the back of
the technical answers we've already had is, if the bill comes into
force at the end of this year, which I understand is on
track,
and then you have potentially two years for things to
be apparently concluded, it sounds like the first real indicator
would be probably in the year before the election, would be the first
truly accurate statistical point in time.
So that sounds like your first very clear measure.
I would say, though, we have an enforcement steering panel
That reviews every fatality-
Mm-hmm
... and serious harm. It comes through a centralized committee with independent
members, and so we would get an early view if we thought
a trend was-
Mm-hmm
... building up through that committee. Yeah.
Can I just-
And once again-
Thank you
... a little more optimism.
Yeah. Can I just say, I wasn't until you mentioned the word bill,
Jan, I wasn't overly confident we were still on the same primary with our various
supplementaries.
That's good.
But in saying that, I do have a couple of supplementaries
further on the same questioning, which was around provision for
the management of the bill,
and the budget. We've got a supplementary from Grant McCallum, and then from
Teanau Tuiono, and then we move on to another primary for you, Teanau, straight
after that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Well, it's kind of following on with the conversation you
told.
It's okay.
We went into the whole ACOP area, so that's why-
Yeah
... I want to raise it. Because you've mentioned several times the importance of
ACOP, of the approved codes of practice,
which is, I think that's probably one thing that I've been feeling a
wide agreement is the potential to make a real difference.
And as a small business owner, it's
that uncertainty about what you actually
have, what the expectations are, because it's been quite confusing.
Mm-hmm.
And so, what led you to put more emphasis on it?
And I'm just curious too is,
because how, why it wasn't
of importance prior to your changes here in
the current bill?
Well, I tend to agree with you. I have been surprised at what has
been a very broad,
positive engagement with the idea of approved codes of practice.
Mm-hmm.
The difficulty has been why have they not really taken precedent?
Yeah. Yeah.
And this came very to the fore-
Mm-hmm
... when I first became a minister and met with people who had previously had
engagements with previous governments-
Mm-hmm
... and they also didn't understand why approved codes of practice hadn't been
prioritized.
Mm-hmm.
It was also part of the Pike River inquiry that we should have more approved
codes of practice, and this is a government that is listening.
That's the real answer to this challenge.
Mm-hmm.
We're a government that is listening, and we're taking action.
The real benefit of the approved codes of practice is that under the law,
it will actually give people certainty of what it is that they need
to do.
Mm-hmm.
Too often, I hear that people don't know what they need to do.
But when you have industry helping to guide what those practical
examples on the ground are, rather than just having it set by
WorkSafe as well, although I do acknowledge that WorkSafe will also have their own
program-
Yeah
... of work,
we will have far better consistency across
sectors of what it is that they should be doing.
Thank you.
Supplementary from Teanau Tuiono.
Yeah. It was just around the response around
work-related suicide. And I was wondering
that when it... I think the response was actually it has to be incredibly clear
that that's what the, you know, that
was the cause of it.
And so with this bill,
psychosocial harm has been legislated out effectively.
And so I wanted to probe a bit further.
What do you mean by clearly, right?
Because people don't just wake up one day from one event and go, "You know what?
It's too much." It's actually a cumulative effect of
sometimes years of issues.
Mm-hmm.
I'm talking about the psychosocial harm part of it.
And so if the bill isn't dealing with that and
carving out small businesses in particular where most
workers are, that's an issue, right?
Mm-hmm.
Because
people taking their lives because of work-related matters is a
serious-
Mm-hmm
... serious issue. And if you're just going to deal with it when that happens, as
opposed to putting stuff in to prevent it, then
I... Yeah.
Yeah. So, very quickly speaking to that one.
My understanding, Teanau, and to all members of the committee is that you have
actually been provided quite a lot of
help to understand this provision through the select committee.
Insofar as the note that I've received, given that your select committee
report came out yesterday, actually said that
psychosocial harms
that are likely to result in death or serious physical harm are a critical
risk. And with the time I had last night to read it, I did actually
see it in the general report back from the select committee that
psychosocial harms are not carved out of the law.
Not all of us supported that report. But that's...
And on the technical bit, I actually wonder whether it would be better to provide
the committee with just what detailed technical definitions
are. Stats NZ do look over this. I don't know if you've got anything more you
want to say, Kelly, but we could do that for the committee as well.
Yeah, absolutely. We can get some information about how we go.
So our data is about making that
determination about whether the fatality arose from the business
or undertaking, and of course, there can be a range of different kind of causes
behind it.
But did you understand my question around cumulative effect, right?
Absolutely.
It could be someone might be dealing with issues for years.
Mm-hmm. Absolutely.
So ideally, you want to sort it out as soon as it arises, not until something
fatal happens. And so if you're just waiting for the fatality to
happen, well,
I would say that's not good enough.
Oh, absolutely. And the question asked was within the context of how we count
fatalities, so that was absolutely where we were talking.
The idea of work being traumatic and creating harm to
people absolutely is part of the critical risk, as the
minister was just saying, that has been made very clear specifically in the
amended bill, so that where work is harmful to
somebody's well-being and may hurt themselves or others-
Can you walk us through, how are you going to pick
someone up that has spiraled early on in the piece?
Can I just talk about employee relations
rather than WorkSafe's duties here?
Because if something's happened over a period of time, that
doesn't fall within our remit. There are other steps
that employees can and should take to address those matters before it
gets to WorkSafe standard.
So what you're saying is that type of issue wouldn't be considered
work-related?
No, I think what she's referring to is that the health and safety system doesn't
work in a complete silo. You also have the Employment Relations
Act,
which also deals with just employer relations in general.
And if someone is going through years of severe bullying,
that should be brought up with the employer through an employment
relations process rather than looking at the statistics at
the end of fatalities based on health and safety or-
But is it a relation
matter or actually a health and safety matter?
For me, I think it's a health and safety matter.
Well, like I said, they don't act in silos, which is why we have multiple pieces of
legislation. However, this is dealing with health and safety.
There is also the element of just good faith relationships
at work in terms of employer and employee relationships.
Thank you. And we can move on to your primary question-
Yeah, sure
... Teanau.
Completely.
Well, mind you, this was your primary question, so we'll move on to your next
primary question.
Yeah, no, sorry, I just gambled it up and I was kind of...
I was wondering about
the minister's
ideas around
high silica engineered stone. We know that Australians
are pursuing an import ban on that.
Does that feature in progress?
You will, Prime Minister.
And if so, when, and if not, why not?
Yes, thank you for the question. So the update that I can
provide the committee this morning is that in
2025, officials undertook broad public
consultation on options for addressing exposure
risks.
Following analysis of stakeholder feedback and international
examples of regulations, the officials held roundtables in
April of this year
to test options with stakeholders.
That included industry and health and safety experts and practitioners.
Both of those groups have raised a complex range of
matters that
MB now needs to consider further. And so the
status of the work is that that further consideration is still taking
place.
They are now analyzing the feedback,
and that's all I have to say about that.
We will have to wait for further analysis to take place.
Okay. Primary question from Jan Tinetti.
Thank you. Minister, I note recently the
Australian consultation that's requiring
crush protection devices on quad bikes
and also the work of banning passengers and kids on
quads. Have you received or have asked
advice from officials amending rules around the
workplace use of quad bikes, given that
research?
Not specifically on any Australian examples.
However, I would simply point to the fact that we do have a range of
work programs on guidance and approved codes of
practice through WorkSafe, and that may touch on those specific
areas.
So-
Yeah. So Sharon might be best placed to answer that.
Can I just ask a question before? I know we'll probably go to Sharon after this as
well. But just a question around has your thinking around quad
bikes,
given that there's been a
huge spike or a bit of a spike, including four deaths
in two weeks-
Mm
... changed your thinking or made you see that or made you think
that maybe we need to put more emphasis onto
changing the rules around this?
So it has always been clear that work,
as well as recreational activities on farms, does
come into being a high-hazard area.
I know that we do have work underway in terms of not just
an approved code of practice for the agriculture sector in
general, but in terms of being more specific to do with
safer vehicles on farms. But Sharon will be far more clued up to
where that particular program of work actually is.
Thank you. Yes, and the Australian one that you're referring to as well is
actually a consumer protection,
rather than health and safety. But you're right, it does mean that crush
protection has to be on bikes if they're sold secondhand or if they're sold new,
but that's outside the health and safety system in Australia.
The work that we're doing on quad bikes, because you're right, that is a concern
for us when we look at agriculture.
You can see about 6% of workers are in agriculture.
It's responsible for nearly 30% of the fatalities.
So a definite area of concern for us.
The work that we're doing on the safe farm vehicle, ACOP, explicitly talks
about quad bikes and farm machinery and
also children on those vehicles.
Mm.
And working with industry, the other pieces of
work we're doing there, we're at field days and caught up with a
couple of places there, Beef and Lamb there in NZ,
really looking about how we can leverage that message out through industry.
And if you haven't seen, a little plug, we put out three excellent videos about
quad bike safety as part of our field days, and they are well worth a watch
and sharing for anybody who wants to promote safety in that area.
Thank you.
Wonderful. Teanau Turia.
This was actually a sub from something you were saying ages back, and I was a bit
slow. And it was around the whole ACC bit that I was sort of asking about.
Have you instructed officials to work with ACC to monitor
the implementation of that bill?
And if you can answer with a focus on
psychosocial harm, which we talked a little bit about today, and also
musculoskeletal harm, given that those are-
I don't know if there is assembly there
No, I haven't specifically asked
our officials to,
in particular, work on the monitoring of that side.
My understanding is that-
I was wondering more-
The statistical-
... with ACC
To work with them just in general?
Yeah, to focus on the implementation of the bill.
I just thought it would be good practice.
Ah, I see.
That's not something I've specifically requested, but I would be surprised if our
officials weren't constantly talking across agency
when it comes to health and safety.
Maybe-
Yeah, I'll just-
Alana can speak to that
... the policy teams for, um, workplace relations and ACC are
in the same branch in MBIE, so they work closely together, and obviously they have
good relationships with ACC and with WorkSafe.
So yes, they will absolutely be talking and sharing.
Great.
Got a couple to keep going.
Yeah.
I was wondering about
targeted approaches to Maori and
Pacific communities within this budget.
Do you have programs that do that, that make sure,
particularly where you have
work sites where you have high density of Maori and Pacific communities,
what's
happening there?
Mm-hmm.
How is that allocated within the budget?
Yeah. So speaking to that one, look, the government does have
a need not race circular,
which does
respond to not just government work, but all Crown entities as well.
I haven't done any specific direction when it comes to WorkSafe on this,
but-
A need not what, sorry?
A need not race circular. So we're focusing on areas of high
need rather than particular ethnicity.
So if I walk you through what I mean when it comes to WorkSafe,
what we do know is that we do have too many Maori and Pacific
Islander
people dying at work or being seriously injured at work.
However,
I believe that there is a real distinction here between is someone
inherently more risky based on their ethnicity, which is not an area I
want to go down, or is it simply that we have more people from
particular ethnicities doing more high-risk work, which is what we
need to focus on. And so if you look at the areas of agriculture,
construction, and manufacturing, which we know are some of our
riskier areas, where we do know that there are more Maori and Pacific Island
people working.
The focus here at WorkSafe has been on how do we ensure that
we're getting guidance, we're getting good ACOs, we're getting good inspector
capability in the high-risk areas
where people from those ethnicities may be harmed, as opposed to
singling out people based on their ethnicity.
So that goes in line with
government programs of work across the board.
Can I ask a supplementary on that? So that makes sense to me.
Look at the forestry sector as a perfect example.
Absolutely.
But would you, through that work then say, well, because there's a
higher rate of Maori and Pacifica employees
or contractors within the sector, that we would look at the way we
communicate that guidance or the way that we design that guidance to
align with cultural practices, the way that they
communicate differently to-
Mm-hmm
... other sectors, for example?
Yeah. Happy for Sharon to talk about the specifics of it, but I just say that as
a high-level assumption-
Mm
... that I think sometimes in government, people point too quickly to
ethnicity as opposed to the particular
variable of maybe work that might be related to the particular
harm.
That's political.
Yeah.
Yeah, certainly. And just to pick that up, so the four areas that we focus on
are agriculture, forestry, construction, and manufacturing, and
we know that Maori and Pacific are over-represented in those industries.
So, we also know, and this is provisional information still,
that the rate for Maori harm has come down
considerably. And in fact, the latest numbers that we've seen, provisional
still, are showing that the rate is just about exactly the same
as non-Maori and Pacific. In fact, Pacific rates have dropped
below
non-Maori and non-Pacific. So the trends are really
encouraging. I think the focus on those key industries is the right
one.
Mm.
And to your point, yes, we have cultural capability because it's really important
to meet people where they are-
Mm
... and to be able to
share that experience. Maori and Pacific are two foundational
cultural capabilities that we look for, but increasingly we're
extending those as well. Southeast Asia-
Mm
... other areas are also very prominent in our workforce.
Very great.
But you still are called Maori and Pacific, correct?
Is it-
Beg your pardon?
I didn't really understand the whole race dot need thing.
You've got to be able to-
But
it doesn't matter what you call them, as long as you can sort of make sure that
you've got targeted programs and make sure that that works as well.
It's looking at the inherent dignity of all people and saying we
shouldn't just put people in boxes based on the ethnicity that they
present as. We should be looking at the specific factors of what it
is that they need. As Sharon's articulated,
if someone has a genuine language barrier, WorkSafe is there to meet them
with that particular need. But the real area of
focus, which is really useful to hear from Sharon this morning, is that where
you have
population groups that are within seriously high-risk
environments-
Sure
... because of the focus, even from the inspectorate on
working in those high-risk areas to provide guidance and
to do enforcement action, we are actually seeing
significant decrease in harm. And that's great no
matter what ethnicity somebody is.
Supplementary question from Parmjeet Parmar.
Thank you. Minister, as you just said that if language is a barrier,
then that's looked after. So obviously language, in that case
it becomes need. So not that everybody in that ethnicity will have
that same kind of barrier.
So can you elaborate on that please for me?
Well, I think it's to what Sharon was saying before.
Having cultural capability is a good thing.
There is difference in our beautiful country in that we are such a
diverse population group. And we do recognize that even on
construction sites, for instance, we have quite a lot of immigrant
populations. Not everybody has English as their first language.
And so it's really important for us that we're not just making
a wide-scale assumption
that we should be presenting guidance in just one particular format,
but working with industry,
and our inspectors working with workers to ensure that everybody
has their need met. Which is that they understand what the law is, no matter what
that language is that might be their first language.
Great. Thank you. Next primary-- oh, sorry.
Oh, yeah.
Is that a further supplementary-
No
... or is that another primary?
No, just another one.
Okay, cool. We'll go to Jan, and then we'll come back to you.
Thank you. I just want to ask some accountability and outcomes from this
budget
question. So what are the main performance measures for this
vote, and how are the public going to know that they've achieved those outcomes?
So I don't have any of the particular performance measures directly in front of me
with my pack, but we're very happy to come back to you on them.
They're very publicly available as well.
So,
Nick, you talked about the multi-category approach appropriation.
So Minister,
has consideration been given to introducing additional
performance measures because of that?
The performance measures are always going under constant analysis
and update. They have not really remained stagnant for a
number of years.
But happy for Hayden to talk through those.
They're not necessarily just set by the Minister.
There is a lot of work and analysis that goes behind the scenes from
MB in helping to set what those monitoring functions should be.
But take it away, Hayden.
So when we set up the MCA, we discussed this with Treasury, and their strong
preference was for us to retain the existing measures,
so there was some comparability. And then from next year,
work on newer measures that might give you a bit more detail and
understanding about the outcomes under each of the five categories.
Okay.
Great. Teanna.
Yeah.
Oh, do you have a supplementary?
Just a sup on that. So sup from that then is
which part of the appropriation and the vote is probably going to be most
under pressure?
Sorry, say that again.
Which part of the vote is likely, and the
appropriation of the vote, is likely to be most under pressure?
I wouldn't expect any of them to be under pressure, but what
I would expect to see is, over time, how the money has
been used within each part of the appropriation to ensure
that we're getting the buckets right.
Given that this is the first year that we have actually separated them out
into the multi-category appropriation,
there is a clear steer from the government of working with
a larger proportion of funding, specifically just on
the guidance section, and then we have a section for enforcement.
But over time, we would be monitoring that to check that we're not
underspending in one particular area, and therefore it's,
over time, meaning that more money would actually go into a different part of the
function.
But I wouldn't expect any area to come under pressure,
bearing in mind that when we were setting these multi-category appropriations,
the funds and the actual appropriations didn't come out of thin air.
Mm.
It was also based on where a lot of the resourcing
currently is. I'm not sure if Sharon wants to talk a little bit about that.
Yeah. That's right. So they were built bottom up and top down.
We did a check of both. So we have about 50% just over in engage,
about 20% in enforce, and about 20% in permit.
And then the rest is energy, safety, and smaller. So yeah, you're right.
We've cross-checked back to the tasks and the people we have doing those roles to
make sure that it's operationally working.
Okay. Last sup here. Is it a maintenance budget rather
than a reform budget
in this area?
I
disagree with the characterization of the question.
WorkSafe, over many years, found themselves in quite a financial
hole. We have pulled them from that hole.
We have now been asking them to focus more on the
engagement side and function, which is what they're responding to.
Could you consider it business as usual?
Well, yes, a lot of what WorkSafe will be doing will be
business as usual. People will still be going out and doing inspections as they
always have been. But what we've been asking operationally is
for them to work within the new act, and
be gearing up for what that new act would look like in practice.
But we have been asking WorkSafe to do that proactively before
the new act is even in place, so that it's ready to go.
So the reform is already happening.
It's just the act is now coming alongside to
give it some of the legislative
side to it as well. But in terms of the operations, I don't think it's really
fair to say, is it a reform budget or a maintenance budget?
The reform is actually coming through the law.
WorkSafe is there operationally to help implement it.
Yeah, the main reform is through
legislation. But on that budget point, a few years ago,
we were quite worried about WorkSafe's financial position.
They were on intensive monitoring from a Crown MC monitoring point of view.
They were spending more than actually was a sustainable
level. Sharon and the board and the exec have worked very hard to bring that back.
So the appropriation's now smaller than it was a couple of years ago.
It's flat in the baseline. And we're much
more confident now
that WorkSafe's in a position where they can implement these reforms
well.
Yeah. But I guess to answer it in another way-
Just adding more money doesn't mean it's a reform.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. Primary question from Teanu Tuiono.
Yeah. There's been
a government announce there's going to be 9,000 public sector job cuts.
So who's getting the chop and why?
So WorkSafe has not been asked to find job cuts.
WorkSafe is in fact going through a bit of a recruitment drive,
where we are trying to get as many inspectors as we
can. Like I said, we've got the highest inspectors that we ever have,
and that is still on target to increase.
But that is in alignment with the fact that we do actually need a
really responsive inspectorate.
So is that the same for the labor inspectorate as well?
You're expecting more jobs to be kind of brought online from that, from that space?
For the labor inspectorate, that is my understanding.
I don't want to get ahead of myself, but we've got Simon here, who's the expert on
the labor inspectorate.
Yes.
Oh, yes. I'm sure he'd be very thrilled-
Of course
... to talk about the next year ahead.
Yes. Thank you for the question. So in the recent budget, there was actually an
uplift in the labor inspectorate, to respond to migrant exploitation.
So an extra six FTE will be coming to the labor inspectorate to raise it up to
about 90 FTE, which is the highest we've had in the last few years.
There's no cuts right across all the different bits and pieces that you're
responsible for in this portfolio?
Within this portfolio, WorkSafe by and large, the majority is
funded through work levies-
Levies, yeah
... rather than Crown funding.
For the labor inspectorate,
it is very clear across this government that we do care about migrant
exploitation, and so we've been seeing an uplift in the area.
Across other areas that I'm responsible for, we've been asked to find
cuts, but not on these particular functions.
What about your other parts? Is there like back office cuts?
Oh, that goes outside of the scope of this.
Yeah, as long as it's within Vote Labor.
Oh, okay.
But if it's not-
I believe there's a very small-
Before another committee
... policy reduction as part of the 2%-
So it's policy people who get the chop
... reduction. It's a very
small reduction.
There's no-
It's part of the appropriation, and we've managed that across MBIE.
That's right. So we're not cutting any frontline functions within this space.
Just to start,
you were talking earlier about, like Jan was asking earlier, around a
reform budget or a maintenance budget.
These health and safety reforms seem big, well they are big,
along with all the other pieces of legislation that have
moved through this committee as well.
Are you confident that you've got enough funding to actually do all the bits and
pieces?
Particularly when,
as we've talked about and discussed in this committee, these are big
changes, and if
it doesn't go the way that you think it's going to go, is there enough money to
shore it up to make sure that things can be put in place so that
workers are safe?
Yeah.
Look, to the overall question here, I think the real answer
is a lot of the function of my role within Vote Labor
is policy function. Like you say, we've repealed, the
fair pay agreements, we've put in place the 90-day trials, we've reinstated
partial strikes.
We have reformed the pay equity system.
We've put in place now the health and safety system.
We have the Employment Leave Bill coming.
We've had the Employment Relations Bill coming.
We have been busy. We have been a very busy function, and I thank the
team hard for all of their work, and all the members here around this committee
too, because I think this has been the busiest the portfolio has been in years.
But that means to say a lot of that is
the policy levers for how the economy functions and
how businesses and employees can work together.
That doesn't require much money from government.
But where we have a genuine frontline response, where it comes to
the labor inspectorate,
we have more resources going into the frontline where it comes to WorkSafe
and the good work that Sharon has been doing.
She's been shoring up more frontline for WorkSafe
inspectors.
And when it comes to things like the dispute resolution function, which
we're also responsible for,
that is a part of an overall piece of work that I'm doing
to really find the pain points in the overall mediation and dispute resolution
service before we figure out if there are more resources that need to
go into a particular function. Given that there are so many levers that could
be
pulled with mediation disputes, we've got the
ERA and the employment court, it would be presumptuous
of us to say one particular avenue needs more funding when then that
could end up having a flow and effect to another area.
So that's why we're doing a full review of that particular area.
A great place for us to finish off. Thank you very much, Minister-
Thank you
... for your time this morning, and we are still in the morning, surprisingly.
Really appreciate it. Can I just say, before you go, we have
a delegation from the Pacific Islands, that have joined us in our
gallery who have asked
committee just if they can take any photos.
We're going to move on to just a bit of time with the officials.
So just wanted
to have that raised before we go to that.
So if there's any concern, just let me know.
No. That's fine.
But otherwise, thank-
As long as they get a good Simon.
Yeah.
But otherwise, thank you very much.
Oh, thank you.
In advance for the officials.
Thank you.
All
right. Thank you
very much. We don't always use all the time, but it's just a really great
opportunity for us to tie up any loose ends that have arisen out of our
conversation with the minister,
and just some helpful clarification time.
So if there are any questions from the committee?
Um, now, I think time. Otherwise, we can let you go.
There you go. Chair, our chair had some opening statements-
Oh, what?
... if you're short of things like that.
You are so welcome.
The good news, he's come all the way from North-
Oh. Of course, you'd know that.
You take, you take as long as you like.
Thank you.
Graham, I'd love to hear it.
Please.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Committee, and, uh, I'll just make a couple of opening
remarks that, uh, actually tie in with some of the things you've already questioned
today. Um, I'm Murray Jaggar, the board chair of WorkSafe,
uh, and I've been in this role for, um, about seven m- eight months now.
Um, and I'm joined today with Sharon, who you've already met, and, and some of her
executive team.
Excuse me, sir, I just can't hear. Can you bring the mic closer?
Move it closer. It does have a setting.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
How's that?
Great.
Um-
No, no
... yeah, as, as you've already alluded to this morning, uh, the work, uh,
work fatality rate has reduced by about 30% over the past decade.
It's real progress, but we all know that it's not good enough, and we need- there
is plenty more to do.
Our role is to in- in- influence business and workers, and to meet their health and
safety responsibilities.
Uh, it's, uh... And I'm, I'm proud, uh,
actually in the short time that I've been in the organization to see how,
uh, WorkSafe has deepened its engagement, uh, throughout,
uh,
organizations, uh, and, and into business.
Um,
we've sharpened our focus on the sectors where harm is highest, and we've
strengthened our inspector capability, as you already heard of, heard from.
Uh, we now see 250 frontline staff, which
is, uh, including inspectors and trainees, and, uh, an increase of
25%.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Our focus on making it easier for businesses and workers to know what good looks
like, and hold, and, and act with, uh, uh, confidence is,
is really, um, at the heart of what we do.
We know we're making progress, and as already been mentioned, our insights
show that 72% of businesses reported that WorkSafe helped
find practical ways to improve health and safety, and
95% made improvements after interaction with WorkS- uh,
WorkSafe visit.
And we've done this while maintaining fiscal discipline and meeting our performance
commitments to the Crown.
WorkSafe is also managing a wider system change through the Health and Safety at
Work Amendment Bill, which we've already talked about this morning.
Uh, whatever shape that reform takes, our fun- fundamentals remain the
same. Engaging with businesses, keeping workers
safe, and enforcing where we must.
And I think that's a really critical, um, point to leave this on,
because that is, is the, is the catalyst to actually making these
change and, and giving you satisfaction that the, you know, regulatory
changes, uh, we will, uh, we will, uh, enact and adopt
them.
So, uh, committee, thank you. We're pleased to be here, and, uh, ready to
answer any questions.
Right. We have any questions from the committee? Any...
We did have a great chance to, um, really ask you some questions while we were
with you earlier. So, um-
Yeah, can I just-
Yeah, go for it
... follow up? Thank you. And look, thank you for the answers that you
gave around, um, the workplace-related deaths
and being a comprehensive number.
You know, I just was reflecting on the questions that Teanau asked
about, particularly around the work-related suicide.
And it seemed like from the answers that you gave to me,
that, um, you thought that w- was already very
comprehensive, but there's so much more to it.
And I wondered whether that was ongoing work for WorkSafe to see that the,
the able to capture that, um,
a bit more clearly around the fact of-
Mm-hmm
... any part of that journey that that person's had, that
work has had a significant impact in leading
them to that, um, final-
Mm
... horrible event.
Yeah.
Yeah, look, let me start with that.
I mean, I guess
all workplace, um, fatalities are obviously reported to us, so we
see them all. And as Kelly mentioned, it's sometimes very difficult
to differentiate between what was going on for that person personally and what was
going on at work, so it's really tricky.
Uh, we do have, um, a dedicated team, our, um, Nga Mahi Hauora,
uh, that look after, um, well-being within our team, and they
also help build capability across our wider inspectorate.
Um, they tend to work in areas where there is a systemic
issue of either workplace bullying or harm.
And so because we can't be everywhere, and this is a big topic,
um, we allocate that team, and they tend to work
primarily where there's a systemic or an industry problem.
That, that's helpful.
Yeah.
Yeah. I mean, and, and how, how does it work with the road-related deaths?
I mean, what, what's the approach there?
I mean, I gue- I guess it would be difficult.
Which sort of death, sorry?
Road related.
Road related. Thank you.
You know?
In, in the main, the police-
Yeah
... uh, are our f- the frontline when it comes to road-related, um, fatalities,
or that they work quite closely with us.
We, um, connect together if there is a, a work-related kind of
connection. We, we keep working kind of, but they would tend to be the ones that
will be at front and center in there-
Yeah
... because they're on the, they're literally on the ground, you know.
And we have a memorandum of understanding with them, the same as we do with
maritime and ports.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
And, and what, what, um, what would be the main causes there around
why that happens? Is it just people not sleeping enough or?
So certainly for heavy transport, it could be fatigue and, and while-
Yeah
... driving. There are rules, uh, in the, in the transport regime, um, to, to
manage that, and that's where the police
focus in that space with,
um, licensed participants in the system transport. But that's, yeah.
And what, what kind of preventative kind of pressure points do you guys push to
ensure that,
you know, take a nap when they need to, you know?
I think, uh, in the main, NZTA would do, do most of that kind of space-
Mm
... because that's their kind of core business, whether it's work-related or not.
Um, but you know, we certainly work with them on, on joint guidance if need be,
and information to, to industry.
Great. And question from Grant McGillivray.
Yeah, thanks. Just following on from, um, Arnold Gentili's questions earlier on
in the whole quad bike space.
From in your views, I'd be interested to hear what more needs to happen to actually
shift the dial in this space because it's been going on and off-
Mm
... far too long.
Look, in the videos we've put out, there's some really simple steps and it's
all in the guidance. Put on a helmet.
We highly recommend that you, um, use crush protection.
You know, farmers often work alone. Fatigue is a factor.
They can be distracted. It can be a hill they've driven down thousands of times-
Mm
... but on this day it just doesn't work.
Mm.
So, the guidance that's coming out which industry has fed really heavily
into, they've been fantastic working with us, has got really practical
steps from the industry that talk about how to reduce this.
Do you have kind of like measurements, like with the video?
So you put the video out, then after the video's out, do you like check
in whether things have gotten better or?
We will work with industry on that.
Okay.
So, industry, Safer Farms are another partner that
we're working with. So we've to get our reach and to
understand what's going on in the uptake.
And they're just a video on your own-
Yeah
... with other levers. And our,
um, inspectors of course are out doing assessments and sharing that guidance as
well. And we, you know, when the guidance, um, is finalized we will
launch that. So we'll make sure that it gets to as many people as we can.
Mm.
Just to, just to carry on from that.
The engagement side of the organization and what it's focused on is really
critical. And the relationships that we develop and the partners we,
we
utilize to support our messaging is really critical.
As we know that, um, you know, that that farming sector you know
well Grant in terms of quad bikes and accidents-
Mm
... it's remote areas, it's areas that are, you know, we can't do it ourselves.
So we, we have to develop relationships and support
networks to actually carry the message.
And, and do you have any assessment on how important, um, obviously you mentioned
helmets, but crush protection is for quads?
Yes. And w- what we've, um, done over the past w- more than a decade actually is
work alongside the Australians because they, they had a-
Mm
... kind of a better, um, ability to do a lot of the research-
... uh, into the effectiveness of, of those devices and we, um, um,
one of our devices, one of our New Zealand designs was put through that, that
testing. So we, we really have relied on their sort of, um, resources to, to
come to the conclusion that we, we believe that on balance they do make a
difference. Um, and that, you know, w- we would very strongly
recommend that people, you know, look at fitting them because they're the, they can
be the difference between you having the full weight of the bike on you, uh, and
the outcome being much more poor than, um-
Yeah, speaking from experience they're a good investment.
There you go.
Yeah.
Yeah, good on you.
Thank you very much. Really appreciate the extra time.
Thank you.
Um, and of course your availability today.
It's been a good one for us so thank you.
Thank you everyone.
Thank you.
Okay.
Biggest turnout we've had so far this week, Minister. Welcome.
It's still the morning, I've just checked.
Welcome to our hearing with you as the Minister of Education.
Really appreciate you and your officials being here.
We have an hour, 10 minutes with you.
So we've got about three and a half to four minutes.
Phil's monitoring the time.
Look forward to your opening remarks, and then we'll open for questions. Thank you.
Thank you. I won't take long on opening remarks.
Thank you.
I'll leave lots of time for questions.
I just want to acknowledge my Secretary of Education, Alan McGregor-Reed, for her
great service over the last year. We have had another excellent
budget. The last two budgets were
pretty outstanding, and I was extremely proud of what we were able to deliver
this year, even given the
fiscal times that we're in.
And
not only were we able to invest in what I said we would, which was
make this a secondary budget because we have got a lot of changes
in terms of NCEA shifting into NZCE and of course, the
senior secondary curriculum coming on stream as well.
We require lots of funding for that, which I'll talk about.
But also, as I promised the sector that we would
continue to invest in the teaching the basics
brilliantly, through our primary and intermediate reforms around
raising literacy and numeracy.
We've made significant investments into structured literacy, structured maths, the
curriculum, the resources, the professional learning and development.
And I made a commitment to
schools in the sector and teachers that we would continue to invest year on year.
And so even though I had suggested last year this would be a
secondary budget, there was a significant amount of funding in this year's
budget as well to do what I said we would, which is continue to
invest year on year. And so it was great to see
$131 million of funding into literacy and maths
support.
In particular, the setup of the maths hubs, the hands-on
tactile resources which schools have been calling for, equipment for their
classrooms,
the additional 36 full-time equivalent teachers for targeted maths supports.
And remembering that that 36 is then half funded, so the schools fund half, so it's
actually double that in reality, which we're building on year, on year, on year,
looking at the results that we see.
Also particularly
excited about the writing tool, which many schools
who can afford to purchase such a tool have done
so. But those who can't afford it are without, and I've had plenty of
calls from the sector to make sure that there was equity and access to tools like
this. And for those schools who are paying for it, freeing up their budgets to do
other things.
And
we've targeted that at that
mid level, intermediate and just under.
We wanted to make sure, though, however, we weren't using digital tools
for younger students, and so that's why you see the workbooks rather than a digital
tool because we want them doing handwriting.
It's so important for their development.
So that's a very exciting
part of the budget.
But then moving into secondary achievement, huge investment
into the supports that we need to support the new curriculum
rollout,
in terms of all of the resources that are required, as
well as professional learning and development.
There is a significant amount in the budget for NZQA, and I've got Grant
Clinkon here today to talk to any of that because they
will have quite a big delivery
function in the new
assessment program. We also listened to schools who said, "Hey, we need a bit of
extra funding for delivering" what's called the co-requisite, but soon
to be in the next few years, the foundational award as well.
And then, of course, the really big part of the budget was the vocational part.
We've always said that it's really important for us to have parity of esteem of
academic subjects and vocational or industry-led subjects.
We are developing those alongside the
academic curriculum areas. But the gold standard delivery, of course, is
trades academies, and there is always more students who want to get into a trades
academy than we have had places for.
So this significant investment to double the numbers by 2030
have been very welcomed by the sector, and we're working through that now.
And also there's some money in there for the Industry Skills Board, of course, to
develop those curriculum
documents in conjunction with- The
sector themselves to make sure that there's a skills match, that we are ensuring
that people have the right knowledge and skills
when they come out.
I just, in finishing, want
to talk about something I'm particularly proud of.
In the last two budgets, we have always had ring-fenced funding for
our specialist schools, and I want to particularly call out those
principals and teachers in specialist schools who do an absolutely incredible job,
and we have been backing them since day one.
This budget invests in 27 new satellite
classrooms around the country. For the first time, we're heat mapping where all of
the black spots are. It also provides funding for
another specialist school, which is now the third we've been able to announce in
three years after having built none for 50 years, and I'm particularly proud
of that, and we'll be announcing where that is once we've finished a little bit of
consulting
in the next few weeks. And
$79.2 million into special education, so I'm particularly proud of that, and I'll
finish there and take lots of questions.
Thank you. And there will be lots, and we're opening with a question from Ginny
Anderson.
Thank you very much. Estimates appropriation highlights the government's expected
to spend just over $12 million on strengthening curriculum insights and progress
study. That same study shows no real change in maths since
2013. Why do you use different international
data set to try and say that there has been a decline in New Zealand?
Well, there's lots of different data points that we use
to look at how the state of maths is.
And I'd note there's a really great letter written by the
NZPF,
New Zealand Principals' Federation, to the Secretary of Education at the time that
talked about the decline in mathematics over the last couple
of decades. There's also a quote from Chris Hipkins in Radio New
Zealand article in 2022 talking about the decline over the last two decades in
maths results.
So there are a number of different things that we use.
International results
showed that we had our worst ever PISA results in around
2022, I think it was. 2029,
TIMSS had the biggest drop as well, which is Trends in Maths and Science
Study. So internationally, we can see that there are huge declines.
And our own data shows that what only 45%
of young people are hitting curriculum expectations by the time they go to
high school. That was under the old measure, NMSSA.
And we've got to remember that that is over a band.
That's anywhere from the end of year six to the end of year eight is considered at
curriculum because we didn't have a year by year standard.
Mm-hmm.
Now that we do, of course, it's dropped and it's in the 20s, which is equally as
terrible. I don't think there's anyone who disagrees that
maths and writing and reading have not dropped over the
last couple of decades, and it's particularly highlighted in
that letter to the Secretary of Education by NZPF in
2021, which basically says there's a lack of leadership,
and the results are terrible. Which I think is clearly
why the previous government invested in the Royal Society math report, which
highlighted a range of recommendations that unfortunately
weren't put in place, but we have now done that through the maths action plan.
So what I'm really proud of seeing in the SIPPS report
is, the SIPPS report measures two things.
Over time progress and averages, and also how
many students each year tip over being at curriculum.
And we traditionally see a massive drop between year
four and year eight.
Goes from like 80% to less than half in almost
everything. Maths is particularly bad.
And for the first time this year, and I'm going to bring my
curriculum expert up to sit beside me because she can talk to this.
For the very first time, we saw a shift away from
that trend in year six of maths. 6% of students
are at curriculum-
Just on that-
Hang on a minute, I'm still speaking.
I'll finish, and you can ask another question.
It's quite long.
It is important to note that at year six, for the first time, we've seen
a statistically significant increase
of 6%, and writing was 5%.
And so that is statistically significant.
To say that there hasn't been an improvement in mathematics or writing is wrong.
And I would invite you to talk to Charles Dar at NZCER, who
I've had the benefit of background information, and I'm very
happy to provide a briefing with my officials and
Charles Dar, if he agrees. I'm sure he will.
I know he wants to talk to you about these results.
But the last thing I'll say is when I spoke to Charles Dar about the
SIPPS results, he said to me, "Minister, what you can
expect will be probably a decline because you've pulled
such a big change on the sector. You've got new curriculum, you've got new
pedagogy, you've got all of these new materials.
The best you can expect is it to stay flat."
When we saw an improvement in writing and maths,
and it is only
after three and a half terms of reforms, that is statistically significant
and was a welcome surprise
to everyone, even Charles, who was like, "If we can see this, small
increases every single year, that's what we need to see." And I want to just shout
out to all of the principals and teachers around the country who made this happen,
because it's because of them, and their picking up of the new curriculum,
and their undertaking of PLD, and changing their teaching practices.
Remember, 80% of them changed their teaching practices in English and maths, that
we are now seeing these improvements, and we should celebrate their success.
Thank you. Supplementary.
Thank you. So this committee has received two reports, one internal, one external,
that say that that change was not, in fact, statistically
significant.
That's wrong.
Why did you also fail to communicate?
Well, you did communicate that potentially incorrectly.
Why did you fail to communicate to parents that that same data you've just referred
to shows increased disengagement from
students under your watch, and it sees an increase
to the share of year eight students saying they do not enjoy reading or
maths and who do not feel they're good at those subjects.
Why was that not reflected as well as what she's reporting a
statistically significant increase?
Well, just firstly, on the first point, you are wrong, Ms. Anderson.
It is a statistically significant jump in mathematics-
I don't think it is
... in year six of 6%.
I think that's your view
It's not my view.
I'll pass over to my officials because I'm not making it up.
It is in all of the reports. It's in a SIPPS report.
It's in the reports provided to me by my officials, so I'll let you speak to that.
Yep. That data comes out of our study
team, which is run by Otago in a partnership with
NZCER. They provide us the results, and they do all the
analysis of that. That analysis pointed out to us where we had
statistically significant improvements and where we were remaining
stable. That including other
data points that are
tested in the study as well, like student engagement
and their enjoyment of the subject.
We have that peer reviewed by our own analysts back at
the ministry to make sure that we've got that assurance over the
data. And like the minister said,
probably we were expecting to see a good, stable flat line
because we're building
momentum over time. We were all pleasantly surprised to see that increase
at those particular levels, which shows us that,
as the minister said,
for the first time, we could see where we were not
replicating the same trend we'd seen in the past, which was
between years four and year eight.
We were seeing less kids being successful at year eight than we were at year four.
And having that
year six check-in, which was new, and the previous government agreed to this,
having that year six check, allowing us to look in and make sure that continuing
decline wasn't occurring,
we'll keep investing, and enables us to pinpoint where those
additional investments need to go to support those students who aren't hitting
them.
Can I make a point around year eight?
Can I ask why it wasn't communicated to parents about the disengagement
factor? So why was that not communicated?
Can I make a point around year eight?
Year eight results are going to take the longest to shift, as you can imagine,
because they've had all of their schooling without a clear curriculum,
without the resources, the materials, and the professional learning and
development. And that's why we're putting so much resource in at year
eight, and year seven and eight in terms of the
maths
tutoring four times a week to 14,000 students, now extended up to
year nine and 10 as well, and the acceleration writing.
And you will see that the results
will be more significant at the bottom end as they climb up.
The year eight teachers are only just going into their professional learning and
development now for maths and for structured
literacy and the like. So, we've been building very much from the
bottom up and rolling it out up the year levels.
So you will expect, I would've expected to see more of a shift in the lower
years because of all of the investment than the higher years.
But even saying that, in mathematics, every single year went
up. In fact, in year three, there's been a 5% shift from '23 to
'25, and in year eight, see only a 2% shift.
That's not statistically significant.
But if we keep seeing that year on year, and as the students from lower year
levels are having all of that support and intervention roll through, it will
improve.
Further supplementary?
Are you concerned that your approach with the curriculum and the approach you're
taking will
effectively rank schools, with those ones at the bottom we know
being labeled schools of concern and potentially being
able to be taken over by a charter school once they're at the bottom.
Do you think that that disadvantages families that are already struggling with the
cost of living?
What disadvantage? Sorry, what's the thing that disadvantages them?
Just explain this
Having your local school the only one that you're able to access being
publicly labeled a school of concern.
I think it's-
Would you want your children going to that school?
Well, if we don't have sunlight on things, things don't change, and that's I think
the reason that we've seen nothing change-
Sure
... for the last-
That's right
... 30 years. And we've had schools that have been failing for decades.
So how does that help them?
Hang on, I'll finish my answer again.
If you just want to run this so that you ask, I answer.
We've had this problem for decades, and what we see is schools
fail, and parents know it.
Mm.
And if they don't have the ability to go to a private school or move or do
something different, then they are stuck with a school that is failing them.
If our different approach is to actually go, "How do we
identify them? And then what do we do to invest in them?"
Mm.
And the effect that we can now assess and look at different
schools and their results. We are now able to
go, "Hey, we've just invested in 350 structured
literacy intervention teachers and hundreds of structured maths intervention
teachers. We've got all of these tutoring programs in maths and in writing.
Now we can help direct resource into these schools."
And also, we can take a look and work with ERO on what school improvement measures
we need to undertake. And we've already got a number of things we're trialing
around the country. We've got high impact teaching
pilots going on. I've got the wonderful Honorable Calvin
Davis working at Portiki College, working on a bit of a blueprint for school
intervention for us. So that we can now say to these
schools, "Hey, we've got the resources for you.
We can come in and invest, and we've got a blueprint to help you change," so that
over time, these schools can become wonderful schools because those are the ones we
need to invest in the most. But if you hide that, we have what we had for the last
30 years, which is-
Last one, yeah
... nothing.
So in the United Kingdom where this was implemented, it did, and it's proven to
further entrench existing inequalities.
I've met with schools in South Auckland who are deeply concerned that your changes
are going to make their communities even further marginalized than they are now.
Through what?
And that's parents and teachers.
Through what exactly is marginalizing them?
By ranking them and calling those schools at the bottom publicly a school of
concern and having ERO come in and-
Well, for a start, we're not ranking schools.
You are.
Schools are not being ranked.
That's what re-education is.
But there is, of course, and there always has been, and I'll get Alan MacGregor to
speak to this. We've always had schools of concern.
Now we're just going to be investing in them to make sure that we improve them, and
you ought to talk to school improvements.
Yeah, and to-
It will be good to hear from Alan how you're investing in them.
In fact, ERO can come because they're the ones-
Yes. Yeah
... If I'll just get ERO up to talk about these schools of concern and.
And also, I would just point out while we're waiting, in the act that we're
changing, we will be acting far more quickly when ERO
have identified a school of concern.
The concern that I had is that ERO will
Identify a school of concern, and then nothing happens.
Mm-hmm.
And they continue to fail. Now it is on us.
As soon as that's identified, within a couple of days, we know it's happened.
Mm.
We get a report within another period of time, and then we have to
do something about it.
Great.
Sorry, do you want to talk about it?
We've always had these labels.
Yes, they've always been around. But I think that the issue now is that it's
clearly a systems approach to actually trying to resolve those sorts of issues.
So we've got more money in the budget to go and
focus more attention on these schools so we're onsite more
often-
Mm
... either termly or quarterly, which I think is a really good way to-- Termly or
quarterly. And then that's really giving us the opportunity to provide
information to the ministry really quickly around what an intervention framework
would look like.
Great. Thank you. We've got a supplementary que- Oh, sorry, Allan.
The minister's right. We've always had schools who have struggled at
different times. Schools come in and out of that cohort.
As a ministry, when we look back in time,
we haven't always had the focus on supporting those schools
so that parents don't have to live with the reality of their
local school or the school they're in zone for not being
a great school for their child.
What we have in legislation, and we've never really used, is a range
of interventions at quite low levels.
We also have at our disposal as a ministry, a range of supports.
And so our focus as a ministry, triangulating with ERO,
is working collaboratively with schools on how can we get in there,
how can we help them, how can we make sure that they are a great
school. And schools will come in and out of that over time.
Thank you. Now go to the supplementary question from Lawrence Yun.
Thank you, Chair. I've got quite a few supplementary questions.
Just want to check if the minister wouldn't mind also to keep her responses
succinct, because we do have quite a few questions to get through.
I want to start by the broader question-
Keep to the timeline
... around junior curriculum,
and yeah, move on to senior curriculum.
Can I check-
Yeah.
Cool
... summary of initiatives, new funding for senior curriculum.
No new funding for junior curriculum, other than literacy and numeracy, which I
know that the minister's already working on.
So there's no new funding for the, let's say, science, social science, arts,
health, PE, et cetera, that is in there, that is required by the beginning
of 2017. Why?
There is new funding. So in this-
Not in the summary of initiatives
... So I believe in the foundation awards, Pauline, and you can tell me if I'm
wrong, if you wouldn't mind coming to the table.
We have the science kits
rolling through. We also-
Science and music kits, but that's not curriculum support.
It is actually. The science kits are not only a box of stuff.
They also contain lesson plans, unit plans-
Mm
... in both Te Reo Māori and in English as well.
So that is quite a significant support that was
designed to go with that curriculum level.
We also have supports that we'll be rolling out with the social
sciences curriculum as well, resources, lesson plans, and the
like. So yeah, you can talk more to that.
So, and we also have the music kits.
So we're looking at each learning area as we roll it out,
making sure that for each learning area, teachers have
a good overview of what that learning area looks like and
needs to be taught each year.
What a unit plan would look like for the content in that learning
area, and what sample lesson plans and topics look like.
So each
teacher, if you like, has got an off-the-shelf package of tools and
resources they can use to start using the new curriculum.
That's supported by the professional learning that's both
making sure we're upskilling teachers in the knowledge of the content and
content of that learning area.
But also,
supporting them build their pedagogical approaches
to teaching in ways that make sure kids
know, understand, and able to do the things that are expected of them in year by
year curriculum.
I can probably explain what you're seeing in the estimates versus what's
being funded.
Mm.
So there was obviously investment last year.
There is some more investment this year.
But over successive years, so we've been looking at refreshing the curriculum
since 2019.
19.
The ministry's had investment coming in.
Mm-hmm.
That investment's still there, so we've been able to move money around
and prioritize money towards the primary curriculum rollout.
So there's work you see additional investment in through the budget, and then
there's existing investment-
Okay
... which will also support the primary curriculum-
Yeah
... which will be introduced.
Sorry to butt in. Yeah.
That's okay. We would like to kind of put an amount to that or ask the minister
afterwards.
For social science?
We can come back in writing with that.
That'd be great.
Yeah.
Just further on, in terms of senior curriculum.
And finally, I've got a final question around overall curriculum budget.
$20 million over two years for initiative over three years for senior
secondary subjects, professional teaching and learning.
That's for all 32,000 secondary teachers, which is about
$600 per teacher across 100
subjects.
What sort of value for money are you expecting from that amount?
600 per teacher.
Yeah.
Do you want me to?
Yeah. You want to take that question.
So of course, in the senior secondary area, teachers don't teach
all of those subjects. They're specialists, and they teach one, maybe two of those
subjects. Some schools may be a little more, but generally speaking,
they're not trying to get over
all 100 of those curriculum.
True.
They do come also with specialist knowledge of their subject
in the main.
And so we build off that. We think, and we're
using a very similar formula that we used in previous changes
to NCA and curriculum,
which was making sure that all teachers would have access
to days where they could unpack the content of their subject area,
and then could look at working together on the resources and the
types of lesson and
lesson preparation they need over a period of time.
And we want them to be able to do that as we roll out year 11, then come back and
do that as they look at what year 12 looks like, and then build on that for
if they're teaching the subject in year 13.
Yeah.
So we think using, as we have
to date, a mix of face-to-face
jumbo workshops and hybrid
types of online forums that we've been using in the
primary sector. We'll have good value for money and good
spread of that professional learning, and those resources that go
alongside it will sit on Tahurangi, freely available to schools.
And can I just remind members we're supplementaries on results.
I thought that supplementary was on curriculum.
Ah, we started on results, but look, we're kind of strayed in there.
It doesn't matter. It's all good.
Okay.
Just-
I just have one final-
Because otherwise it's going to go wild.
Thank you. I have one
final question on curriculum. This is for
minister and ministry. Minister, are you aware that in Budget
2026,
some of the lines for funding on what is being
reflected for both the
budget for 2025 and the actual budget for 2025 is wildly
different from what is stated in Vote Education 2026?
So I give you an example. In Budget 2025, for centrally
funded professional learning and development, the budget was $106.9
million. That has not changed in the supplementary
estimates. But in the budget that we're seeing
in Budget 2026 for Budget 2025, this is page
124 of Budget 2026, that figure has changed
drastically, and there's a $40 million reduction.
That's-
Why has the... So I've matched the appropriation line
by line for curriculum over the two budgets.
Some of them are consistent, but some of them are wildly out-
Um-
... by millions and millions.
So we can come back in writing to you on any of those matters.
But what will happen in any big change program is we will
estimate the costs for any given year.
But as we get into rolling things out, we might spend more in
one year, less in one year, and we transfer money over
into future years.
Which will be reflected in the supplementary estimates.
Mm.
This is not-
This isn't?
No.
Okay.
This is to do with-
Andy?
... what is supposed to be budgeted in the previous 2025 year that's
now $40 million less this year.
I will get my budget estimates document, Blade- ...
to talk about that technicality.
So without looking at the specific example, as well
as the fact that service lines do sort of shift
between years, we've also pursued quite a significant restructure of
the estimates for Vote Education this year-
I know
... which has involved recategorizing quite a number of expenditure
areas. And so I think it's likely that there's
something within that line that we've decided better sits within the future
appropriation. What I can do is come back to you with
some more information in writing on the estimates restructure.
Yeah.
And if it's helpful, and the minister agrees, we'd be happy to sit down and
work that through with you in more detail, if that's helpful.
I think that's quite helpful, because $40 million out is quite significant.
Yeah, sure.
Yeah, it's not lost. It's just either been transferred or we've spent it somewhere
else. And Andy's right.
In an aim of more transparency around what we're actually spending on what as a
ministry, we have restructured our appropriations, made improvements to our
performance measures.
And OAG actually did mention to me ahead of time it might be
useful to make time available to the committee to talk through
that restructure and how things map. So that could well be it.
Great. Thank you.
We've a supplementary question from Grant, then Hannah.
We'll move on to a primary from Lawrence, and then we'll carry on from there.
Just going back to the schools concerned, because Lawrence sort of went off on a
different tangent
.
Hurry, curriculum.
That's all right. It's all right.
Just like I applaud what you're doing because
the
example I use
of being more proactive and why that's so important is in
my own electorate of Northland College, where they
got to the point they had a commissioner.
How would it advantage the local parents who knew, and those kids who knew, that
things weren't that great if we weren't able to be more proactive?
As I said, one of the things is that we're not getting on top of things early
enough. And we are now looking at how we do things differently,
because we have also looked at some of the data I had ERO pull
it a while ago now on what happens after we put commissioners and
LECs in. And we move on to the next- And over a five-year
period,
we don't see a significant shift.
Mm.
We've got to do things differently.
Yeah.
We have to use really good data to know exactly what sorts of investment are
required. We need to act more quickly-
Yeah
... because we're waiting way too long-
That's right
... to intervene. We need to intervene much earlier.
And so, having this consistency of reporting and having
ERO in more frequently allows us to do that.
We want to make sure, and I've talked about this a lot, around
that equity piece-
Yes
... that no matter your background or what your parents do, that your means should
not determine your destiny. And
unfortunately,
the reality is, in this country, your means do determine your destiny.
Mm-hmm.
We have to shift that, and part of that is being open and transparent about the
state of education and making sure we're putting in.
That puts transparency and accountability on us as well.
Mm.
Because you want to see over time the number of schools who are moving out, and
staying out, and being out successfully.
And that's a really important figure.
If you
don't have this level of transparency, then governments can continue to float
along. Things are not doing well- ...
but there's no accountability on us to do things either. Bill.
So if you want to add to that.
I'll just add to that. Minister, we've supplemented a new
service that we've been offering since last year, and a little bit before that,
with leadership advisors. And these are
former principals or principals we have on secondment that work very
closely with principals in the sector.
That is a huge
additional support to principals in the schools, particularly
those that are working their way through how they might be turning around
longstanding challenges-
Yeah. Yeah
... and working in communities where there's longstanding challenges.
In addition, some of our statutory interventionists,
our commissioners, our limited statutory managers, they're
building quite a practice. So if I refer to the very good work
done at Northland College-
Yep
... that raised its NCA results over the last year.
Some really good work done by Dr. Edwards-
Yes
... working alongside and with the school.
These are the kinds of practices that we need to
introduce to schools before a statutory intervention is
required.
Yes.
So we're looking at how we improve our service mix right
across the country with that in mind.
And you
may remember in the last, not this budget, but the last budget, we doubled the
number of those leadership advisors from, I think, 16 to 32.
32.
Yeah.
Committee, can I just remind you, we're still on the first primary.
So we're going to have a final supplementary from Hana-Rawhiti Maaka Pak, and then
we're going to move on to Lawrence Yuen, and then we've got a range of other
primary questions. So if I just... Bear that in mind.
I know that each primary question gets really exciting, but just we've got to
keep it moving, otherwise we'll get stuck. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Am I able to still do the results and curriculum?
Or do you not-
Yep
Okay, cool. I'll be quick.
Just in terms of results, for decades, regardless of which party has
been in government, Maori education has only received
around 1% of the total budget across the country.
Many Maori education settings continue to
achieve exceptional outcomes, with some kura, like Ngā
Taiātea, Ngā Tapuwae, achieving 100% NCA
pass rates. And I was just wondering what specifically in
this budget or this 2026 budget goes to
creating more of those formulas or more of those
systems replicated for other kura, bilingual,
full immersion, wharekura, to achieve those pass rate for
NCA?
One of the things that you've heard me say a lot is I'm particularly proud
of the fact that when we are developing any of our
work streams or any of our products or any of our resources or any investments, we
are always thinking about making sure that those same resources
are available for kura and our
bilingual units as well in te reo Maori.
So you've heard me say that a lot. All of these
same things, although we didn't split it out specifically in this budget,
but when you look at the 131 million in primary, for example, all
of those initiatives will be provided in te reo Maori as
well.
The Maori-
We've made sure that
not only that the smart tool has got a te reo Maori
version, that the CITS-
Maori-
We've never done curriculum insights- ...
for Maori medium before, ever, to be able to track their results,
to know where and when to intervene with a whole lot of these supports.
So while it's not
split out,
that same way of operating works in this
budget as well.
Of course, we are bringing on additional curriculum areas.
We're expanding out the Te Marautanga o Aotearoa curriculum,
and introducing new curriculum areas in the New Zealand curriculum as well.
So there's a huge suite of things that we're doing, and we've done it every
single year, and we'll continue to do it again.
I think
someone might like to remind me, but we just passed a milestone the other day of
our
kura classrooms. I forget exactly what it was, but we ticked over-
... yeah, 100. It was 100 classroom.
We've gone and proud up to
Maungatauri the other day,
and announced their brand-new site and building of that school.
So we are invested in making sure that parents have choice.
We know that there are significant wait lists for kura,
which is why the property department, for the first time ever, have now got...
are using that data in their network planning, which they have
never done before,
and in close cooperation with TRN and Ngā Kura a Iwi as well.
Thank you.
Did you have a further supplementary?
Just a supplementary on curriculum, really quick.
Yeah.
Budget 2026 allocates 74 million towards curriculum and
qualification reform. How much of that funding is
specifically supporting Mātauranga Māori this year in
2026? So not-
Mm
I want to be quite specific around Maori knowledge,
not so much translation of curriculum that already
exists, like mathematics and science, but Maori knowledge specifically.
I'm not sure if we'll be able to do that because...
Well, I'll ask my officials. But just at a very high level, we are
not translating documents. Te Marautanga is
not a direct translation,
and you can talk a bit more to that.
Also, and I would invite you to look at the new curriculum area.
I want to give the example of one of the curriculum writers who's a
secondary geography writer for us.
I was down at Hamilton High School, and I ran into her and she said,
"There is so much mātauranga Māori in the social sciences in
our area that never existed before."
I would invite you to go through and look at the curriculum areas because,
yeah, we may have a discussion about how much, but there is a
lot more than there was before-
The Māori is growing
... in every single area. And that's a discussion that different parties can have
about the amount, but we were very specific about making sure that
that was in there. Whether or not we can go through and work out in the budget how
much was allocated to, I don't know.
But I would invite you to read both the primary, all of the primary
documents, and the secondary documents, and compare them to what we had
before. It is much-
What about the one you chucked out?
Oh, come on.
Hey, guys.
Through the Chair.
Through the Chair. Thank you. We're going to move on to the next line of primary
questioning. So we've got our next, and our second, might I remind everyone,
primary question is from Lawrence Yuen.
Thank you, Chair. Just so you know, the overall theme of the primary question is
around learning support.
The first question is, so we know that a lot of schools use
their ops fund for- Additional supplements to learning support as
well. Why has there only been a 2% increase to Ops
fund, even though the inflation we're looking at is going to be at 4%?
And we have consistently, which is a National Party commitment
in the last
election, that you're going to match Ops funding
specifically to
inflation.
What I said this year and last year is that not everything is
delivered through the Ops grant. We have delivered
a number of things that are easing pressures on Ops grants.
So for example, the fact that you don't need to purchase
if you don't want to, the PAT assessments because we've provided the smart tool,
which is free, which frees up $10,000 out of your budget.
We're providing the digital writing tool, which some schools are spending $20,000
on. We're providing centralized professional learning and development, so to
free up schools' PLD part of their budgets.
We are providing so much more resource.
If you think about all those maths books that schools were investing in, $10,000 to
$20,000 each.
We are providing a huge amount of resource that is freeing up schools'
budgets,
so that allows them to do more in other areas.
Not everything is delivered through that budget
increase.
Can I just ask, so I've got a few more questions then now on ORS funding.
So ORS funding is paid at the rate of $23.78
for year one and year two, and $23 for year three.
Even with the pay equity top up, it's no more than $30.
That includes GST, but doesn't include holiday pay.
Can you just go back and say that again? I'm sorry.
Sorry. For year one and year two schools-
Yeah
... it's $23.78 an hour.
For year three schools, it's $23 an hour.
Even with the pay equity top up of $8.06,
that's not nearly enough to account for the expertise that some of them
have when it comes to ORS funding. So schools not
only have to top up for the holiday pay, which doesn't include in the
ORS funding payment, but they also have to top up
significantly. On average, when we talk to
principals, you're looking at 25% is
a good estimate for a school to spend on learning support.
For rural schools, sometimes it can be well above 50% of Ops
funding being used on learning support.
Why has the ORS funding hourly rate not been adjusted?
I will let officials talk to that. At a higher level, you will remember
at last year's budget, a significant increase in funding for
learning support, 750 million.
Mm-hmm. 186-
A lot of those,
sorry?
I was going to say, are the other 180 million because most of them, your own words,
were reprioritized.
There was a significant investment into learning support.
Yeah.
$750 million went into learning support.
And one of the things that I was really proud to see
this morning, because I got the latest figures, is that a lot of those students who
weren't receiving support at all before, that were draining schools' budgets
because they had to get teacher aides and pay for it themselves.
Now that we've changed the funding model for ORS away from a capped
amount to demand-driven, which I was told
we'd never get, but we have,
884 more students around New Zealand
this year have received ORS support.
Which means that they're now receiving teacher aide hours, that they were getting
maybe nothing before at all. So that is a significant
number of extra students who are now getting support and ensuring that
the
drain on the schools' budgets for those students who were having to potentially
provide support before,
doesn't exist in the same way. So that is significant.
The same with the number of young people who are supported through the early
intervention scheme in year one, because we've rolled that out to the end of
year one now, so
support doesn't stop when you start school.
There's
14,674 students who've been supported since
January 1st through that scheme, which is
about 3,800 more than
2025. So lots more students are getting support.
And this year already, we've rolled out an extra
896,000 funded
teacher aide hours. So that is rolling through the system.
It only started in the beginning of this school year, so it's
rolling through.
And
I'll let the team talk to how it works in terms
of the funding that we provide and then what we've put
through the Ops grant that supports that.
So I think if I was to pick up off the minister in terms
of the availability of ORS now
not being capped, so not having an overall
funding constraint at the headline level,
but instead it is demand-driven, is a significant shift for us in the
way that we deliver funding to those students that have
been verified for ongoing resource scheme.
There is work to do on the rates, there is work to do
on the process around those, but that shift is quite
significant. It is enabling us to fund more
students than we have been able to fund previously through that
scheme and to provide more
hours. What we're trying to do is to bring into line work we're doing
around the rollout of learning support coordinators on quite a
sea change in investment in learning support before we start
looking at the individual rate levels.
We need to bring these different types of funded services
together at the school level in an integrated way so we
can actually see what schools are delivering.
But the problem is that this is not what we're hearing from the community
level when it comes to ORS funding because I agree there might be an
increase in number of people who have been given, but we also heard that
previously, people who would have been accepted for ORS are now being declined for
ORS on a specific example.
No, I'm sorry.
In that case, you may want to talk to the New Zealand Down Syndrome Association
because they have seen a reduction in terms of people-
And we're really-
We've also seen-
We're really looking into it
... I'm happy to look into any cases, but-
The criteria hasn't changed
... the criteria hasn't changed. Each is validated by experts.
We run quite a-
A strong and effective process in relation to that.
And because it's not capped and is demand-driven,
there is no reason for funding to be declined to people
unless the validators have indicated that
the criteria have not been met.
Let us take a look at that.
That'll be helpful. Thank you so much, Minister.
One final question on this is in the summary of the initiatives under learning
support, school high health needs fund volume pressure,
100 additional eligible students.
Two-part question. Would that meet the demand? Number one.
Because it's over four years, how many students would you expect this year?
We can come back in writing on the forecasts this year
versus next year, but we face that number on the demand trend that
we see.
Okay.
So we can come back in writing-
Thanks. Yeah
... with the profile, but it's all based on our forecast demand.
Thank you.
Right. Thank you for the opportunity.
Supplementary, Madam Chair. At a time when schools and parents are struggling to
manage behavior, why did you cut positive behavior for
learning programs that benefited over 400 schools?
Well, I wouldn't
say that the
initiative has been
cut because it still exists.
The two contracts have been cut.
Yeah. It still exists. Let me just grab the right paperwork.
So we can talk to this in a bit more detail.
But essentially, the majority of funding for PP4L
remains.
There were a number of
reasons that we have changed some things,
and a couple of these programs
we weren't seeing the benefits of.
There wasn't any evidence that what was put into essentially some
trials was working, and we've shifted that funding out
because we have, and you will see in the budget documents, a
Ready to Learn initiative. So we have taken that out of here,
and put it into a Ready to Learn initiative.
Now this is an initiative around, we're going to
pilot it in South Auckland.
We're taking a cohort
of young people who have been disengaged for whatever reason from learning.
A lot of them will be Māori and Pasifika.
They may be Ōteātea young people who have been
disengaged and are struggling to reintegrate into school.
We know we have a problem.
This funding, through these particular programs, wasn't seeing the benefit that
we wanted. We're going to set up something different in South Auckland to target
these young people. They may be school starters, they may
be young people who have become disengaged and need to come back into the system,
and run a trial in South Auckland to start with,
and then get it to a point where we can scale it nationwide.
So sometimes you will see things that we are stopping.
It doesn't mean that the funding is disappearing.
We are reprioritizing that across here into something that we want to see that will
be more effective.
Thank you. So just to be clear, you asked for some kind of an impact assessment, a
cost benefit analysis, or some form of evidence on those
programs and how they're performing before signing off, getting rid of
them?
I can get my officials to talk to that.
But these are things that they bought-
You must know that though. You've-
Well, let me finish. The way that we've been running our budgets
over the last three years is quite different than you probably would have seen
under your time in that we are having a
far greater look at the contracts that we run and the outcomes that we get,
and I say to my officials every time, "I want you to bring me things that in your
mind, with what you're seeing,
are not working." Now, a lot of these things, because they predated me, were
absolutely rolled out, but haven't actually been collecting very good evidence or
weren't particularly well contracted.
And sometimes can be quite difficult to tell because it's all
quantitative rather than good qualitative data.
We don't do that anymore. All of the contracts that we're signing are making sure
that we have a clear outcome, we know what we're
contracting, and we expect good evidence and data so that we can
monitor it. So I'll get my officials to talk more to these things, but these were
things that were brought to me so that we can have this really well contracted,
targeted, and well-evidenced piece of work in South Auckland
with those young people.
I'm seeing the Chair, and in an interest of time, I'll keep it high level.
PP4L is a wide suite of contracts, worth far more than the 11
million that's been reprioritized.
This is four of the smaller contracts.
They've been running for 10 to 15 years.
We reviewed them in light of the significant investment going into attendance
services, which also focuses on similar population
groups, along with what the minister mentioned.
And on that basis, they were reprioritized.
But PP4L wider is still in place.
A couple of these are also around training, and they've been doing it for 10 to
15 years, and there has to be a point at which you say, "Well, we've been doing
this training for 15 years,"
and
we've done probably tens of thousands of teachers.
We've got a real problem with disengaged young people, particularly in Ōteātea,
that we need to get on top of. And-
100,000
... that's where it's going to.
So schools report that these programs
did work really well because they also worked with parents to
get on board early and manage behavior early.
Why is your government focusing on penalizing parents for
non-attendance, but taking away 11 million from
programs like this that target some of the root causes why
children aren't attending school?
Well, as Helen McGregor-Reed has just mentioned,
we have contracted through attendance services,
and we're using iwi, we're using community people, all sorts of people
who are doing exactly that. We've just contracted it differently through attendance
services. And you'll have David Seymour later-
We do
... and you can dig into that with him.
But essentially
We've been running it through attendance services, and now we're able to
free up some of this funding. Most of it is around training that we've been doing
for a long time,
that we can now put into these targeted groups of kids.
So just to be clear, that you've taken 11 million out of this and you're running
a pilot somewhere in South Auckland. Is that what you're doing with the money?
That's what I've said.
Right, and when is that going to start?
I'll get my officials to talk more to that. We're just designing it at the moment.
One of the things that I was really worried about was
schools who were saying to me that young people, especially in OT care, were
turning up with no support, and we end up having a weird fight between OT and
education about who funds the support that they need.
Because a lot of these young people have been in pretty awful
situations, and there isn't any support for them when they come into school.
They've been disengaged for some time.
And we know who they are. We can draw a ring around them,
and we can invest in them, and so that's what we want to do.
And it makes sense to take out
training that we've been doing for 15 years in a couple of programs.
And another pilot that ran, a very, very small pilot,
and to target these kids who need help.
Just to clarify before Geoff goes into the detail of the pilot.
The 11 million that's repried, some of it will go into that
pilot, but others will go into things like high-impact teaching practices,
which are also proven to have a positive
impact on behavior, recognizing that those
are attendance service contracts which are working with those families and
communities are also in place. So I just wanted to be transparent, the 11 million's
not direct all going to-
And are you able to provide the committee with the information that shows PB4L was
not, in fact, delivering? Is that available?
Let's be clear. Again, it's not PB4L overall.
There's a multitude of contracts.
So two of the contracts, for example, were for restorative
practices under a particular program.
One of the providers has ceased wanting to deliver the program
because they don't consider it part of the suite of initiatives that
they wish to deliver. And another one, their contract ends at the
end of this year. So,
these are not contracts being stopped mid-flight.
These are for initiatives that have
come through over the years, but actually a number of the providers
are also wanting to move away from.
And it is in a context where we are delivering a whole lot of
additional supports through attendance service providers, and now we have an
opportunity through the development of an initiative
which we'll pilot in South Auckland for focusing on around 100
kids,
for us to be able to support that transition back into school
for those young people that fall out
for a year, or two years in some instances, and
require additional support to be reintegrated into their cohort and
curriculum. That's happening at younger ages, and we want to
make sure that we've got the transition supports into school right from the
outset. So, we've got quite a lot of work to do on the design with
schools in South Auckland to make sure it's fit for purpose, and then it
will go through a procurement process as we do with most other things.
Right. Supplementary question from Carl Bates.
Thanks, Chair. Just on the ORS funding and the applications
by schools. Prior to the last election and prior to the announcement,
there was a lot of feedback from schools around the time it took for those
applications to be processed. Can you give us an update, Minister, on how
quickly they're now being processed?
I can get my officials to contribute to that.
There's quite a bit of work happening in the background
around making sure we're streamlining.
And I've had quite a bit of feedback on further work we need to do in the
future as well, and making sure that when we're
doing a ... Because quite often if you get a decline, you're able to
go back for a reconsideration, and making sure we're streamlining that
process as well. But I can get my officials to talk more to that.
It's well under the target.
So I think the target is around today, around half day.
So it might just-
Great. So it's actually this increase number of students that are being funded
under this new setting?
Yes.
Fantastic.
Great. Next primary question from Grant McCallum.
Thank you.
One of the things you're investing in is the smart tool for assessment, right?
Mm-hmm.
I'm just really curious as to say why you've put this in, and
then what feedback you've had in this space.
Yeah. Well, it
predates me a long time. When we were in opposition, we looked at EROS
reporting on
what we needed in this space. They've been saying for a really long time we need a
nationally consistent tool.
Every other country you compare ourselves to-
Yeah
... has a nationally consistent tool or tools that they use
throughout primary. We do not have that.
We don't have anything that is required to be used a certain number of times per
year. So it is what has been, whatever schools determine.
Yeah.
And so it's been all over the place.
And not only have ERO said that, also the Auditor-General in the last couple of
years has said exactly the same thing.
Consistency of assessment, so we're able to track data,
and invest really early. Now, the tool that a lot of
schools have been using is PAT, and I remember doing it as a kid, so it's quite
old. Run by NZCER, but it's really great.
We wanted to be able to give schools choice.
Many of them have been doing it for a long time, and they want that longitudinal
view.
But it does cost. It's a significant cost for schools that
is a drain on the ops grant, of course.
We have had a tool that we've used for the last 20 or so years called
eAsOT, which was developed by the ministry.
But it is very old technology. It is at the end of its life.
It doesn't do the things we want it to do, and we want something that was up to
date, that was freely available to schools, that
tracks progress, importantly, tracks progress over time.
Next year, it will be completely computer adaptive, so it will move with
the student's ability to give you a really good idea of how they're progressing.
And that's the key word, progressing through school and report to parents.
There's sort of three elements to this.
Not only do parents want good information about how their children are doing,
in conjunction with teacher judgment and all of the formative assessment they do in
the classroom, but a moderation tool that sits over the top.
And lots of schools use PAT for that, and now they have the availability to use a
freely available, really high-quality, ministry tool as
well. So-
Parents get great information. They get not only the results of the
assessment that's combined with teacher judgment,
but also reporting by strand in mathematics, for
example. And then, of course, for the school to
measure their progress over time, for teachers to know what next steps in
learning are. But for the ministry, really important, it tells us
where to put more resource. For example, when we did the phonics
check, we put that in place. It immediately told us we needed more literacy
intervention teachers, and we funded them, and now we know where to put them.
And it'll be the same with the maths check when it comes in place at year two, and
the skills check at year five. Helps us to know exactly where to put
investment. But we've just been through the first round of it.
The feedback we've had has been really great.
It's the first time. When we did ASTEL for the first time, there were lots of bits
we had to change, and we took lots of great feedback.
We've been running workshops all around the country. We had 500 at one in Auckland.
We're doing the rural tour now at the moment.
I've got Giles, who's running the program all out in rural areas, getting
feedback as well. I was at a classroom the other day where the students gave me
some feedback. They're like, "It was great. We loved it.
We want to be able to hit Enter to go to the next question rather than click the
thing." So we're taking all of that on board for the next round.
Yeah, it's a brand new tool, and there'll always be things we need to adapt.
But overall,
we've had really positive feedback. It's a freely available tool.
It is high quality. All of the assessment questions have been
designed in New Zealand. Some of them we took from ASTEL. Only 15%.
That shows you how old it was, and it weren't fit for purpose.
And we're adding more and more, so next year, fully computer adaptive.
And using the same, I would also point out, the same AI technology in
writing that the PAT test does as well. We've tried to align that.
And it will just get better and better with time.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you. Moving on to our next primary question from Jenny Anderson.
Thank you. Why was the contract for-
Oh, sorry. I'm so sorry. You did two, and I didn't write it down because I didn't
know where to write it down. Lawrence, just a quick supplement, and we've got to
move on to Jenny's-
Sorry. Just on the SMART tool, and one of the things we checked before is around
data privacy.
Mm-hmm.
Can I just check and confirm from you, Minister, and potentially from the
ministry, that the certification accreditation,
particularly the security certification accreditation report, has now been
completed?
Yes.
Okay. Is that publicly available?
I don't think it is at the moment, but I can find that out.
Sorry. I don't know the answer to that.
We can check.
But there's no reason why it couldn't, but we'll get that to you.
Yeah.
And can I just check, but we also hear feedback
of concern and anxiety from parents, from students, also from schools and
teachers around SMART. What is the rationale without having
done the sort of background monitoring, ironically, monitoring and
checking of SMART before
the minister and the government has
expanded to cover year 11?
What sort of checking do you mean?
So, like the thing that you mentioned before, Minister, they were
anecdotal, right?
Anecdotal. Yeah.
We don't actually have any sort of tangible-- Because it's what the
minister's heard and what we've heard, and what we've heard is that
there's widespread anxiety around by parents, by teachers, by students,
by whanau around the use of SMART, the complexity created,
particularly at the secondary level when, in fact, they have to use multiple
reporting system because it's not just literary, numeracy they report on.
The overall data concerns and the fact that there is, in both the
gateway testing 2024 and 2025, there was considered a red
alert when it comes to this tool. So there is still a lot of concern.
But then this year's budget has rolled it on to year 11.
Pauline can talk to all the technical detail.
It doesn't go to year 11, so-
That's according to that summary of initiatives.
I can-
We can talk-
I can speak to that.
We can talk to that.
Yeah.
So when we're doing the budget bids, we were looking at a tool
to use for the foundation award at year 11.
Subsequently, we're just working this through with the minister now,
as the foundation award at year 11, literacy and maths
will be part of a co-requisite for the qualification.
We feel it's more appropriate that NZQA will pick up the running of the
year 11 assessment under the conditions and using the tools that they
find appropriate. So we've made a change since the budget bid based on the
fact that now it's part of the qualification, it should sit separately.
So we won't be using-
So we won't be using SMART-
... SMART tool for-
... for-
... foundational award. It'll be run separately, and that's the change.
But in-
So then in that case, sorry. This is kind of important.
For page 27, the SMART expansion up to year 11 is no longer-
That money will be used for year 11, but it will
be-
But NZQA separately
... run by NZQA.
Good to know. Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you. Sorry, Jenny, we'll come back to you now.
That's okay. Why was the contract for benchmarking the
curriculum not put out for open tender in New Zealand, and instead given
to Australian provider Learning First?
Do you want to-
Yes.
Talk to that?
Because I'm not involved in procurement.
Thank you. We used the Australian
company at the time because they had been working with us on
a number of the learning area developments.
We wanted to make sure it wasn't all curriculum areas, it was maths,
as I recall. We wanted to make sure that the
changes that were being recommended to be made to the maths
curriculum through that first year of use were going to
continue to be internationally
comparable. And we wanted to timely
to be as the new curriculum. So like we time to time did selective procurement
based on the availability of a provider who could do the job in the
timeframe.
So, Minister, we knew you personally met with Ben Jensen for a coffee
in the Gold Coast to discuss the benchmarking of the curriculum,
as the text messages I've received reflect.
Was that before or after the contract for them had been
finalized?
I will have to go back and look. I don't remember.
Okay.
He was one of lots of people at a conference that I met with.
And-
Had a coffee
... there are--
Had coffees with lots of people.
Mm-hmm.
It's all in the diary.
But there are very few people who are able to look at
curriculum all around the world
and give us an accurate benchmark of where we should sit.
Well, it's funny you say that, because the guy you mentioned before, Charles Darra,
who you said you'd meet with regularly, his outfit in New Zealand can do
that work, and they would've loved to have bid for that contract.
But no New Zealand company even got a look in. Why?
Because I don't have anything to do with contract procurement.
It's up to the ministry.
But you meet them and talk to them about it.
They make these decisions. I meet lots of people. I meet with Charles Darra, too.
In fact, had a phone call with him just the other day.
I meet with lots of different people, but contracting decisions are an operational-
Sure
... requirement on the ministry, and I have no part in that.
Will you disclose what the total amount that was paid to for Learning
First and that contract?
You will have to ask the ministry for that information.
Because we can't get that information.
We're going to the Ombudsman for that information right now.
Well, that's up to the ministry. I don't-
Okay.
Final question. Final question.
I don't decide on contracts.
Will you-
And I also just don't decide on funding.
So that information will come from the ministry.
Will you rule out, we haven't been able to get that,
will you rule out that Learning First wrote any parts
of the curriculum?
Well, as far as I'm aware, Learning First were
contracted to be able to help us to internationally benchmark.
But that is a matter for the ministry, because they do the contracting .
We did use Learning First. They supported us find
content from other places that we were looking for in terms
of how we make sure we meet the criteria of a knowledge-rich
curriculum, where we were looking for particular examples
that our own writers were struggling with.
They helped us source content. That was brought into the writing
process in the ministry, and that is now out for draft.
And subsequently, we are working through the feedback we're getting to
that draft, and our writers will finalize that content later this year.
So they did write parts of the New Zealand curriculum?
Yeah. No, they didn't write parts of the New Zealand curriculum.
They sourced content.
They sourced content for us.
Right. Is that different?
Well, yes, because once you write- Once you get the content
... What we do is we
... When you're working on the curriculum writing process, a lot of content gets
put on the table. And when you are organizing that
content for what's needed in this year level,
what's the progression of that, how will we sequence that learning, we take the
content, and we get the writers to present that as a
draft, in a coherent way. Some of that
content is part of that. I couldn't point to it, but some of that
content will be part of it. Some of it that they source for us would not
be.
And your view from the ministry-
I think you would expect us-
Sorry
... on that point, I think you would expect us, of course, to look at what other
countries do, what are other kids in other countries learning, and make sure that
our students are on par with what other students are learning.
Not only the benchmark level, but what are they learning as well.
And so, there's a range of different countries we look to, and
different
states and different countries. And you would expect us to go, okay, well, rather
than starting from nothing, what does everybody else learn to give us a bit of
an idea about-
And the Kiwi curriculum-
... where does the rest of the world-
We did use Kiwi. We used New Zealand writers and sourced content
from here as well. We already had content from
previous curriculums. So it's a blend of content,
important job to find one that was-
Just to you, minister. So you're confident, both minister and ministry,
that NZCER was not able to internationally benchmark the New
Zealand curriculum, and you took that determination upon yourself by only
going to one. Only one provider was
able to do that tendering.
The minister wasn't involved in the contracting, and I've explained the rationale
behind our selected procurement some months ago.
Right. Okay. So I have a supplementary question from Pam Shitpaman, then we move on
to our next primary.
Yeah. Thank you. A very quick sub. Is there anything in ministry's mandate that
stops the ministry from sourcing external experts or bringing
any expertise from another country?
Is there anything that stops it?
No, there is not.
Okay. Thank you. Next primary question from Willow James Fly.
Uh, good day, Minister. I just want to make some inquiries about the
money that has been reprioritized from an underspend
in Kaupapa Maori and Maori medium education.
It's about $7.3 million per year. $29 million
over the four years.
Why was there an underspend? Where has it
gone? And has it been reinvested? Has it all been reinvested
in Maori medium education in Kuria Kaupapa Maori?
It's on page 130 of the budget.
Yeah, the committee might want perhaps to take some other questions while I have a
look at the estimate document so I can give you a specific answer to that question
if-
Yeah.
... more may come up.
Right.
It's not documented in our reprioritization, so it may work.
Right. So it is, it's on page 130.
Specifically, the title was Kaupapa Maori and Maori medium education
reprioritizing underspend funding,
7.3 million every year for four years.
Page 130.
We'll just get that information-
Yeah
... and we can answer it.
So I just have a question for you while we're waiting for the answer.
Jump the queue.
You talked last time, Minister, about being keen to focus
on including parents in the communication you have about how students are
doing. Have you got funding in this budget for that,
keeping the parents up to date with the students' achievements and things like
that?
There's quite a lot of work that's gone on
and around keeping parents updated, not only through the smart
tool, but through the new reporting requirements as well, and the consistent
progress descriptors that we're using across the curriculum.
Not only there, but also in reporting on schools through the way that
ERO are now
doing their reporting on schools, giving parents much clearer information.
And also through the parent portal, which is new as well, giving parents a lot
more information about what their children are learning, so that they can tag that
into the school report that says,
"Look, we need a bit of extra work in measurement." They can click into the
parent portal on the year level, into measurement, and do a
range of things at home to help support that.
It hasn't been available before. What we're really trying to do is bring parents
far more into the conversation, much better data, and then access to things that
help improve results.
Thank you. So follow me to a question from Lawrence now.
One quick sub. Does the ministry do any sort of tracking on how much time
teachers and schools are now spending on
contacting or in communications with parents compared to 10 or 20 years
ago?
I don't think we tracked it 10 to 20 years ago, so I wouldn't have a
comparison.
But has it been tracked at all?
Not unless schools are sending it through to us.
Schools certainly note that they have regular contact with parents, but we would
expect that
having good connections with parents, families, caregivers is really important.
I think also having to track that kind of data would be overly burdensome on
schools if you're expecting us to try and work out how much contact time teachers
have with parents would probably be something that would just add another layer of
complexity to their job.
Absolutely, but the reason I mention this is because the
more time, it's important for parents to know, I absolutely agree with that.
But it's also important to note that the more time that teachers are spending
having to be in communications or responding to emails, et cetera, from parents,
particularly very difficult parents or difficult parents, what then you will see is
it's time that they cannot spend in front of
a child, or potentially teachers are spending two weekends, quite late in the
evening, having to respond now to parents.
This is not really an estimates question.
Yeah, so-
But this is following on from-
Look, you're welcome to... Lawrence, can we just, in the interest of time, because
we need to come back to Willow-Jean's question with the answer.
Sure. That sounds very good. Thank you.
We can follow up in writing-
That'd be good
... and if it's appropriate, then-
In the interest of, you know
... it'll get passed on.
Yeah, absolutely.
Thank you.
Just following up on Willow-Jean Prime's questions.
Yes.
Yeah, thank you.
So this was an initiative from Budget 2025.
It appears in the estimates document because it lists a number of
initiatives from previous budgets going back some years, including
initiatives going back as far as Budget 2022, for example.
The reprioritization was a forecast amount of money
that was put aside by the previous government for the
2023 teacher and principal collective bargaining that
related to Māori medium schools and
the costs of settling the collective agreement in Māori medium schools.
It was reprioritized because the forecast was slightly over relative to
the amount of money that was actually required to pay out on that budget
initiative. And so once we'd redone the forecast in Budget
2025, we were able to take that allowance back.
And so where's that money gone?
Well-
Back into Māori initiatives?
So Budget 2025 reprioritized quite a large amount of money from the
sector and then put it into a series of new initiatives.
I'm afraid we're not able to-
Are they Māori ones?
We're not able to talk about Budget 2025 estimates because we covered that last
year.
Mm-hmm.
So we're very happy to-
But they would be ongoing
... supply a copy of any information from last
year's budget about where the reprioritization has gone to.
Can I just also, I know while we're not supposed to talk about last year's budget,
but it is important that we were the one, I was minister that had a
Māori part of last year's budget that invested
significantly, 14.7 for Te Reo Māori
training for teachers, 10 million to the Virtual Learning Network, which Kura
Kaupapa had asked us for, four and a half million for curriculum resources and Te
Reo Māori, 4.8 for curriculum advisors,
frontline advisors to support kura and Māori medium settings, 2.1 million to
introduce the new Māori subjects.
But what's specific in this budget?
So, well, this was-
Specific Māori funding in this budget
... this was last year's budget, which you asked a part of, and it was
reprioritized, as you've just said, last year.
So I'm just pointing out that there was a huge Māori
education package last year, which is rolling out every single year.
Mm.
And I've always, I mentioned, sorry, you weren't probably here at the very
beginning, where we talked about all of the initiatives in this
budget. As we've done in the past, we always make sure that we are
providing those in Te Reo Māori or for Kura Kaupapa as well.
So that same
equity of funding
will continue through the, for example, the 131 million into the primary
support-
But that's not specific funding
... will be. Well, it is specific because we are providing it in Te Reo Māori as
well for Kura Kaupapa and Māori medium.
So we didn't split it out this year, but it is all in there because we're taking
the same approach of making sure we're equitably funding a bilingual education
system.
Thank you very much, Minister. Thank you to the officials.
We're finished with you and our time now. Yes, amazing.
That 70 minutes has gone by rapidly.
Appreciate you making yourselves available to us.
Thank you all for coming.
Thank you.
We'll see you in a couple of hours.
Yes.
We'll see you ministry officials back.
Yes, we will be back.
Committee